                      =Hunting a Home in Brazil.=
                                  THE
                         AGRICULTURAL RESOURCES
                               AND OTHER
                   _CHARACTERISTICS OF THE COUNTRY_.
                                 ALSO,
                        THE MANNERS AND CUSTOMS
                          OF THE INHABITANTS.


               By J. McF. GASTON, M. D., COLUMBIA, S. C.

                     Late Surgeon Confederate Army.


                             PHILADELPHIA:
             KING & BAIRD, PRINTERS, No. 607 SANSOM STREET.
                                 1867.




        Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1867, by

                          J. McF. GASTON, M. D.,

 In the Clerk’s Office of the District Court for the Eastern District of
                              Pennsylvania.




                             INTRODUCTION.


The present publication is the result of observations made during an
extended tour in the central portion of Brazil.

The most ample facilities for exploring the territory were afforded by
the authorities of the empire, and more especially by that high-toned
gentleman and liberal-minded statesman, Conselheiro Dom Antonio
Francisco de Paula e Sousa, to whose personal and official support is
due whatever of value may attach to this collection of facts.

This daily record was made for the information of a number of personal
friends, but the conviction that many other persons are also interested
in a region of such vast resources, induces the author to submit it to
the public, as a faithful description of the soil, productive climate,
people and government, of the country.

All the requisites of a desirable home have been found in Brazil; and a
consideration of the data here presented may enable those concerned to
determine upon the propriety of transferring their residence to that
favored land.




                       HUNTING A HOME IN BRAZIL.


Having made a pleasant voyage from New York, it was announced early on
the morning of Tuesday, September 12th, 1865, that our vessel had passed
Cape Frio, and that we were approaching the harbor of Rio de Janeiro.
The rugged shore upon our right hand presented rather a dreary aspect,
relieved now and then by a few scrubby trees, or the green foliage of
vines springing from the crevices of the rocks. This mountainous
rock-bound coast is very irregular in its outline; and the ocean,
dashing against its base, throws the white foam of the waves high upon
its sloping edge, then to break into spray, and fall back into roaring
waters.

The guardians of the entrance consist of two conical islands of solid
rock, known as Pai (father) and Mai, (mother.) Farther south there is
another small island of rock, upon which stands a light-house to guide
vessels approaching at night.

The indications for the mariner are so distinct, and the water so deep
and free from obstructions at all points, that pilots are not required.

The gigantic and towering spire of rock, known as the Sugar Loaf
mountain, first attracts attention in nearing the city, but all must
realize that it fails signally in its resemblance to the conformation of
a sugar loaf. In one position, when nearly opposite to it, as our vessel
passed into the harbor, the proportions of a cone with a regularly
defined outline were somewhat striking, but in all other situations it
simply presented a huge peak of rock, upon the left of the immediate
entrance to the city. There is also another conical peak upon the right
side, and though not in exact opposition to this, they serve as immense
pillars, constituting the portals of this maritime metropolis of the
world.

The atmosphere had become sensibly cooler during the night, and it was
observed in approaching the harbor that the thermometer had descended to
70° Fahrenheit, for the first time during the voyage. The temperature
from 20° north latitude, to 20° south latitude, varied from 80° to 85°,
but it has gradually fallen since passing 20° south latitude, until now,
in 22° 56′ and west longitude 43° 09′, we have the very comfortable
temperature above mentioned. Early this morning my overcoat was found
very agreeable, and this state of the atmosphere is in striking contrast
to all the representations ever received as to the climate of this
region. Indeed, the temperature has not been oppressive at any time
during the voyage, except for a few days after leaving New York; and
instead of the sultry atmosphere which was anticipated in passing the
equator, a pleasant breeze was at all times prevailing. It is highly
probable that this influence of the sea-breeze may not be so sensibly
felt in the city and harbor of Rio, which is locked in by mountains upon
every side, except the narrow entrance to the harbor between the lofty
cliffs.

Upon approaching this gorge-like opening of the mountains from the sea,
we get a distant view of the shipping, and that portion of the city
immediately upon the margin of the water.

A large fort called Fortaleza da Conceicão is seen upon the right,
projecting out boldly into the water, while on the left an extensive
range of neat and commodious barracks is seen at a considerable
distance, between two elevated projections formed of land and rock. Upon
getting opposite the fort, an officer upon the ramparts called out to
know from what port our vessel came. The captain replied, “From New
York.” The officer called again, “How long out?” to which the captain
answered, “Fifty-one days.” The call was made through a trumpet, and our
flag being English,[1] the language corresponded to the supposed
nationality of the vessel; but I confess that it would have required
good guessing to divine what was said, and the captain’s answers were
made according to his preconceived idea of the questions that would be
asked at this place.

We now observed ahead two other forts, one to the right having the
appearance of being formed from the solid stone, while the other on the
left seemed to be constructed of hewn stone. Each of these works had
quite a number of guns of small calibre placed in barbette, while the
large fort was arranged with casemates, as well as embrasures in the
ramparts.

In addition to these structures for the defence of the harbor, there
were several works visible upon the cliffs on either side, which might
serve to annoy, and even damage, the vessels of a fleet, without being
in any way liable to injury from the hostile guns. The known efficacy of
a plunging shot could be brought into operation from these elevated
positions, while the gunners would not only have exemption, by the
difficulty of elevating guns to reach such a height, but are effectually
protected against an enfilading fire by the peaks of solid rock which
flank these works on each side.

Our bark came to anchor shortly after passing the forts, when a
custom-house officer and an officer of the police came aboard, to get
the manifest of the vessel and report of her passengers. We gave up our
passports and reported our baggage, with the understanding that it had
to be taken to the custom-house for examination, previous to its going
ashore.

This official, who examined our passports, could not converse in
English, yet asked each man if he was single, which I supposed was to
elicit information whether there was any one under his charge on the
bark, and answered in the affirmative. The captain, observing the
mistake, stated that he desired to know whether I was single or married,
when my entry was changed to correspond to the responsibilities of a
family. These officials were very polite in their demeanor towards us,
and shook hands with all upon leaving.

The captain now had his boat lowered and took the other passengers and
myself with him to the city. It being late in the afternoon, and nearly
two miles to the wharf, our four oarsmen had a stiff pull, to take us
with that despatch which was desired, to secure time for business on
shore.

We passed through the shipping which lay in the outer bay, and
immediately past the guard-ship, so that it might be seen that nothing
was taken ashore in the boat. Upon nearing the wharf, we encountered a
large number of small boats manned by negroes or Portuguese, and a few
by the sailors from the different vessels in the harbor.

Before leaving the bark, it should be mentioned that several boats came
along side with cards from the respective ship chandlers, which they
were very intent upon delivering to the captain, with an invitation to
take a seat in the boat for a row to the city. One of these was from the
firm of Baldwin & Co., with which he expected to deal, and at which we
stopped a short time after going ashore. Mr. Baldwin had left the city
for a visit to Baltimore, and we were told that his impression was, that
an honest man ought not to continue in this branch of business. The
house however seems to be well supplied with the various articles
usually needed aboard of ships, and it is likely that persons needing to
purchase any thing in this line may do so on as favorable terms here as
elsewhere in the city of Rio.

From this place, which is very near the wharf, we proceeded with the
captain to the house of Phipps Brothers & Co., on Rua Pescadores, who
are the consignees of his cargo. The young men in the office spoke
English, and were very accommodating in giving us information in regard
to various matters outside of their business. We learned that Colonel
Clarey from the city of Baltimore had arrived in this city a few days
previous, and it was supposed that he was still here. But we were
subsequently informed that he had left the city, and proceeded by way of
Santos to the city of São Paulo.

In passing through this business part of the city, several negro men
were seen with little else than a cloth around their loins, carrying
immense burdens; while negro women were seated upon the side-walks with
the body of a chemise as the only covering above their waists. These
women were engaged in traffic of various kinds, and seemed to be as
entirely unconscious of any undue exposure as we would suppose Eve was,
originally, in the garden of Eden.

The captain had some Brazilian money, and made a very satisfactory trade
with one of these women, getting three oranges for a dump, which is
equal to two cents, and bought enough to give us all a good bait of this
delicious fruit. I had a United States twenty-five cent coin, for which
she was only willing to allow me eight dumps or sixteen cents, but I
declined her proposition, and afterwards got ten dumps or twenty cents
for my quarter of a dollar,[2] and invested a portion of it forthwith in
oranges. It is one of my weak points to have an inordinate fondness for
oranges, and this fruit being unusually fine in Rio, and very cheap, I
expect to consume a large number daily. Bananas are also very abundant
and very cheap; but it is not the season for pine-apples, and the few
here are held at high prices, even as much as fifty cents each.

I was struck with the large strings of onions that were seen hanging in
almost every part of the market, and was told that they are shipped to
the port from Portugal in immense numbers, though the soil and climate
of Brazil is said to be well adapted to their production. Those things
which grow here in great abundance, without work, satisfy the wants of
the lower class of people, and they do not care to devote their energies
to tilling the soil.

The streets of Rio de Janeiro, in the business portion of the city,
through which we passed, are for the most part very narrow, and having a
depression in the middle to serve as a drain. It is difficult for two
carts or other vehicles to pass each other, and on one occasion we had
to enter the door of a store to avoid contact with the wheels, when two
carts were passing in one of these narrow defiles leading to the store
of Phipps Brothers & Co. In going to this place, however, we passed
through Rua da Direita, which is at this portion perhaps the broadest
street in the city, and upon this is located the business palace and the
church of the Emperor, Dom Pedro II.

In front of these buildings is an open plaza, with a fountain of water
on the opposite side, at which persons may be seen almost constantly
filling their vessels with the pure and limpid fluid, that is conveyed
by an aqueduct from the hills outside of the city.

This plaza is constantly occupied with carriages and hacks for hire, and
there are also quite a number of two-wheeled tilburys, having
accommodation for but one person beside the driver. Mules are generally
driven in these vehicles, two to the former, and one to the latter, and
while they are used almost exclusively in all public equipages, it is
not uncommon to see a fine pair of mules likewise in an elegant private
carriage.

The mules here present a fine appearance, being of large size and having
good action, with apparently more life and spirit than the mules with us
in the United States. This however is accounted for by the comparatively
light service which is done by them, which came under my observation
during this afternoon.

I observed that horses are also used in private equipages and for the
saddle, but they did not strike me as being of superior quality. There
was a number of fancy-colored horses of rather small size, in single
harness, and they seemed to be compact, hardy animals, with good action,
and fine spirit. They belong doubtless to the stock of wild horses
captured in the plains of Buenos Ayres or in the lower provinces of
Brazil, yet I had no opportunity of instituting an inquiry as to their
origin.

Among the many vehicles seen in the streets of Rio de Janeiro I observed
nothing like the buggy which is in common use in the United States; and
the two-wheeled, one horse tilbury is so much better adapted to narrow
streets and short turns that it is not likely that it will find a rival
soon in the four-wheeled buggy of modern invention.

Omnibuses or “diligencia” are seen moving to and fro with great
activity, and this progressive feature of a business people is evidently
in successful operation, with the usual advantages accruing to a large
number of customers, over that of carriages and tilburys, which are only
hired by the few for transportation to a special point. The large number
of negroes that are seen upon the streets, both male and female, with
the marks of tattooing upon their cheeks, and in the persons of the
females with fancy figures on their arms, indicates that the African
slave-trade has been carried on with this country very actively at a
comparatively recent period. Most of them appear strong and active,
while many are not exceeding twenty-five years of age. The men were
employed in such business as we might expect slaves to do, but most of
the women were selling fruit or trafficking in other little dainties, as
if they might be free.

I learn that it is a common thing here for a number of slaves to hire
their time, and form a combination together to work out their freedom.
It is decided by lot who is first made free, and the order in which the
others are found, and yet all are bound to remain together and
contribute all that is received into the common treasury, until the last
is liberated.[3] This is among the men, and I don’t know that any such
arrangement has been adopted by the women.

Upon returning to our boat, we had a view of the line of ferry boats,
which has been introduced here, upon the same plan as that adopted at
New York and elsewhere in the United States. A gentleman from North
Carolina named Rainey organized a company here some years ago, and has
brought out two double-enders from New York for this service, which run
from the city proper across to Nitherohi and other points. Their trips
are made with great regularity every half hour, accommodating a large
number of people.


                                        WEDNESDAY, _September 13, 1865_.

After returning from the city last night, my overcoat was found
comfortable, and a blanket was used for covering during the night. The
temperature this morning is very pleasant upon the water, it being 72°
by Fahrenheit’s thermometer.

Having learned from Phipps & Co. that a vessel was expected to leave
to-morrow for Baltimore, I made an addition to a letter written on
yesterday to my wife, and putting a United States postage stamp upon it,
I gave it to these gentlemen to be forwarded by the captain of the
vessel.

Upon inquiry for letters at the post-office this morning, I was handed a
long list of written names with the simple announcement “English” by the
clerk. This implied that these persons had letters in the office, which
had come through English mail, but most of the names were either
Portuguese or Spanish, and very few really English. My own not being on
the list, it was inferred that no letter had arrived for me. As I had
left home upon the 26th of June, and gone by way of New Orleans to New
York, occupying an entire month before leaving the latter port, there
had evidently been sufficient time for any communication that might have
been sent direct, to reach this city in advance of my arrival.

I must encounter many difficulties in my intercourse with the people of
this country, from the ignorance of their language, and my objects in
the line of business will be to some extent embarrassed; but there being
a good many people here who speak both English and Portuguese, it may be
in my power to obtain an interpreter when needed.

Having letters from Colonel A. V. Brumly to Mr. M. Tweedle and Mr.
Robert Habersham, who I expected to find employed in the engineer
department of the Dom Pedro II. Railroad Co., I repaired to their
building, and was pleased to find that Major Ellison, chief engineer,[4]
and his brother, also employed in this office, were both from the United
States. I learned that Mr. Tweedle had left the road and the country
long since, and that Mr. Habersham was in charge of the construction
section sixteen miles above the terminus of the present track. As I wish
to see the country along the line of this road and on its projected
route, I hope at a future day to make a visit to Mr. Habersham.

I was referred to Mr. G. N. Davis, No. 92 Rua da Direita, for directions
to the office of Senor Don Galvão, the official agent of colonization,
and when he was informed as to my wishes, I was pleased to hear his
proposition to accompany me whenever it might suit me to make the visit.
Mr. Davis also said that he could provide a room over his store for Mr.
Mallory and myself, and we will eat at the restaurants, until something
further can be learned as to our movements.

I met to-day at the store of Baldwin & Co. Dr. Henry C. Bosworth, who
gave me information in regard to various matters of interest, and
tendered his services at any time that he could be of any assistance to
me. He is from the United States, and practised dentistry in this city
for a number of years very successfully, but has now retired from that
business, and has an interest in the ferry company, which promises to be
a very profitable investment.

It is the impression of Mr. Mallory that Dr. Bosworth will render him
very important aid in getting into business, and from his courteous
manner, and his general intelligence, I would expect him to have
considerable influence among the people and the officials of this
country.

We were likewise introduced to a Mr. Smith, who came from Virginia some
five years since, and has been engaged here in railroad contracts, which
he says have proved advantageous to him. He accompanied us to one of the
public gardens of the city, where we saw a variety of rare birds, among
which were a pair of large white swans and a large black swan, with some
water-fowls of a beautiful red hue and very graceful form. In the
fish-pond we were told there was an immense specimen of what is known as
the ox fish, that feeds upon cabbage and various other vegetables; but
it did not come to the surface, and the water being muddy at the time,
we failed to get a sight of this curiosity.

Mr. Smith now has a contract with the city improvement company, who are
employed by the government to arrange sewers, for all parts of the city,
by underground drains, which shall take every thing to receivers at the
margin of the water, and there undergo a process of disinfection and
purification.[5] In connection with this, it is contemplated, likewise,
to construct a privy upon each man’s premises, whether he may desire it
or not, and thus make amends for the total neglect of this household
arrangement in by-gone years and even at the present time.

As a substitute for privies, chamber-pots or wooden stands of various
forms and capacities are used in all the private and public houses of
the city. These are emptied daily or at stated periods, and the contents
carried by negroes in wooden cans, upon their heads, after dark, and
emptied into the harbor. By the use of coal tar in the vessels kept in
the houses any unpleasant odor is to a great extent prevented; yet the
whole programme is disgusting, and the people may well congratulate
themselves upon the new order of things which is inaugurated by this
city improvement company. At present it is a common practice for men of
all classes of society to urinate upon the side-walks, in the most
fashionable and most frequented streets of the city, and the stench in
passing some of the recesses that are most frequently resorted to is
such, that it is a matter of surprise to learn that there is no public
ordinance forbidding this offensive nuisance.

We returned in the evening with the captain, and found the atmosphere
more pleasant upon the water than in the crowded thoroughfares of the
city. I was particularly struck with the beautiful display of the
gas-lights of the city, as seen from the deck of our bark. The precise
and distinct lines of light along the margins of the water formed a
pleasing contrast with the irregularities of the winding ways upon the
hillsides, and the dazzling points to be seen here and there in the
private grounds. To appreciate fully the rare beauty of this view, it is
proper to state that the city of Rio de Janeiro was originally located
in a cove, that is surrounded by elevated hills, and these again having
a bordering range of mountain cliffs.

At the present day all these lesser hills are occupied by residents, and
here many of the finest houses and most tasteful grounds of the city are
arranged, one above another, to the very summit of these elevations. It
is upon these slopes that the gas-lights present such an interesting
display, when viewed in the quietness of night from the shipping in the
harbor. The lamps upon the vessels, moving gently to and fro under the
swelling of the waves, are seen in every direction around, like so many
fire-flies filling the air; but the glittering lights of the city
present more the aspect of brilliant constellations, and were viewed
with that kind of satisfaction which is felt in looking upon the
firmament in a clear night. While I sat upon a coil of rope
contemplating this scene, the deep-toned bells of the city sent forth a
sound, that was faintly echoed by the numerous bells of the many vessels
striking the passing hour; and apart from this, all was serene and quiet
in the bay and city.

The busy stir of vehicles upon land, and the moving hither and thither
of boats of all grades upon the water, which is so characteristic of
this centre of commerce and trade during the day, all ceases at night;
and rest or recreation is the recourse of the laborer and man of
business, while for the student comes meditation.


                                         THURSDAY, _September 14, 1865_.

We expected to move into the city to-day; and being advised that my cans
of tomatoes, peaches, and pickles, with some tobacco, which had been
brought from New York, might not pass through the custom-house unless
they were included in my baggage, I put all into my mess-chest. These
articles had been procured with the expectation that they would be
required on the voyage, and finding the vessel well supplied, very
little had been used; yet I wished to retain them for use in exploring
the country, where provisions might be scarce, and hence declined to
accept the offer of the captain to buy them for the bark. Upon entering
the custom-house with these things, and foreseeing the importance of
having these matters understood by the officers in advance of their
examination, I requested Mr. Hagins, who does business with Mr. Davis,
to proceed with me to the custom-house and represent the facts. He gave
them to understand that the articles were not for sale, but for my own
consumption, and, after some difficulty, arranged the matter without any
charge for duty or the imposition of any fine for violation of
regulations.

We moved into the room in the third story above the store of Mr. G. N.
Davis, which is rather contracted in proportions, but has the
recommendation of being well ventilated, and having a water view from
the windows.

The apparent ease with which my heavy mess-chest was carried up three
flights of stairs surprised me. It was a good lift for two of us to get
it from the bark to the small boat, and yet this African negro carried
it upon his head from the custom-house and up the stairs without any
inconvenience; for which service I was told that two dumps, or four
cents, was considered a proper compensation.

It is a peculiarity of this city, that burdens are generally carried by
the negroes upon their heads.[6] A large and heavy piece of furniture
will very often be carried upon the heads of four or six negro men, who
keep the step together by chanting or by tapping a bell. They usually
have upon their heads a piece of cloth rolled up after the turban style,
which prevents the direct contact of the hard substance that is carried.
The ordinary receptacle for a number of articles to be carried is a
large, flat wicker-basket, with a concavo-convex bottom, which fits upon
the head; and they move along with quite a load in these baskets, giving
no assistance whatever with the hands. In some instances they are seen
plaiting straw, or sewing up the material in the form of a hat, while
carrying these loads; which indicates a spirit of industry that was
scarcely to be expected of the negro race. I am informed that the
greater portion of the negroes doing this kind of business are slaves,
who hire their own time, and all is for their personal benefit.

We dined at a restaurant, and our bill of fare consisted of pork cutlet,
beefsteak, potted beef, fried Irish potatoes, salad, cucumbers, and
coffee, with bread of excellent quality. For dessert, we had marmalade,
oranges, and bananas, making, together, a most substantial dinner. The
cost for both of us was one dollar and seventy-five cents, which, being
eighty-seven and a half cents each, was rather more expensive living
than our pecuniary resources would warrant. I had not spent any thing,
however, in getting ashore, and having done more physical labor than
usual, my appetite called for something extra, and it was enjoyed.

After dining, we found that night was approaching, and the gas-lights
were already emitting their brilliancy upon the streets. We walked down
to the open space provided with seats in front of the Circle de
Commerce, upon Rua da Direita, and seated ourselves, for the purpose of
observing the manners and customs of the people. I was impressed with
the genteel bearing of those who resorted to this rendezvous; and quite
a large number of well-dressed gentlemen were seated here, or walking
about the open pavement between the seats and the buildings, who gave a
favorable indication of the physical characteristics of the better class
of men. A very fine equipage, with a white driver in livery, stopped
near the seat we occupied, and a gentleman and lady, with their
daughter, as we supposed, alighted from it, all dressed with much
neatness and even elegance. They passed through the fancy confectionery
store below, and ascended to the upper story of the building, where
ice-creams, &c., are served in magnificent style to visitors.

It is very seldom that a Brazilian lady is seen upon the streets of Rio
during the day, which is in part to avoid the scrutiny of men, and
perhaps, also, to obviate the embarrassment of seeing those same men
under circumstances not very becoming for observation. The heat of the
sun during the day is likewise doubtless a reason why the women remain
within doors, and they find the temperature of the night air more
pleasant for exercise. The number of ladies from other regions of the
world, that are now residing in Rio, is beginning to make some changes
in the habits of the sex; as English women or French women go out upon
the street whenever business or inclination calls them to take a walk or
a ride in the city. The custom here has been that of great seclusion
among all classes as to their women; but the more intelligent and
refined Brazilians are learning that a different course is the true
policy for the promotion of the true character of woman.

I had no means of knowing whether the party referred to were natives or
foreigners; but their style indicated refinement and good taste. Their
carriage was of the most fashionable make, with accommodations for four
persons within, and a broad front seat for driver and footman. The upper
part of the body was of open cane-work, and the entrance on either side
wide, so as to give a light and airy appearance to the vehicle. The
livery of the driver and footman was of blue cloth, with silver lace
upon the collar, and a high, slick hat of enamelled leather with a band
of silver. The team in this instance, as in most of the fine turnouts of
the fashionables, was a pair of fine mules; and really these slick and
lively animals, being of full size and well proportioned, present here a
better appearance than horses.

This promenade is one of the few places of resort for those who do not
go to the theatre and opera; and though there is a hotel and an
ice-cream saloon here, there is no special entertainment for the
numerous visitors that come and go in the course of an evening.

So far as I have been able to learn from others, balls and parties of a
public character are not frequent in this city; and indeed the whole
constitution of society is opposed to this kind of promiscuous
assemblage of the sexes.

There are several large establishments for theatrical performances, and
also opera houses, suited to the different classes of people. The
Emperor considers it a matter of sufficient interest to sustain and
patronize these places of recreation, and I am informed that he
frequently attends in person accompanied by his family. His object is
doubtless to promote what he esteems the happiness of his people, and
not from any idea that they will be thus diverted, so as to prevent
their minds from being directed into mischievous channels.

The pacific character of this people, and their great proneness to
adhere to an existing state of things in all the departments of life,
with their general admiration for the noble traits of the Emperor,
affords a guarantee for the stability of this empire, independent of its
constitution and laws.


                                           FRIDAY, _September 15, 1865_.

I called this morning, with Mr. Mallory, at the office of Major Pedro
Latão da Cunha, Secretary in the Naval Bureau, to whom he presented his
testimonials of qualification for service in the Ordnance Department.
This gentleman speaks the English language, and seems to take
considerable interest in promoting his wishes. He advised him to draw up
an application to the government, setting forth his former services, and
what duty he desired to enter upon here, and proposed to present it with
his recommendation to the Minister of State.

Upon making an inquiry as to the practicability of being employed in the
Hospital Department as a surgeon, after completing my investigations in
the country, he expressed a favorable opinion; and stated that it would
be desirable that I should draw up a paper indicating the nature of the
public service in which I had been engaged, and the position I would
like to occupy here.

He proposed to take this likewise in his special charge, and to use his
influence to advance my wishes. It had not been my intention to make an
application for any position under the Brazilian government at this
time; but since this gentleman manifests such an accommodating spirit, I
may find it convenient to undertake for a time some duty connected with
military hospitals, near the seat of war, and thus see something more of
the country towards the south.

After closing this interview, I repaired to the store of Mr. G. N.
Davis, and he accompanied me to the office of Senor Don J. C. Galvão,
No. 23 Rua Dos Ciganos. This gentleman also speaks English very well,
and received me with great respect.

He heard my statement of the projected move of myself and my friends to
Brazil with evident interest; and exhibited to me maps of the country,
with records of lands owned by the government, and also descriptions of
improved farms of private parties, which were offered for sale.

The price of public lands ranges from twenty-two cents to eighty-eight
cents per acre, to those making an independent purchase. To those
without the means of buying land, or of supporting themselves
separately, one hundred and fifty acres of land will be provided, under
the regulations of the government, in one of their colonies—to be paid
for at the rate of one dollar and thirty-three cents per acre, one-third
at the end of two years, one-third at the end of four years, and the
last third at the end of six years.

The family are to be furnished with agricultural implements free of
charge, and to be allowed one dollar a day for six months for each
adult, with transportation from Rio to the colony free of cost. As yet
there has been no advance of funds by the government of Brazil to bring
emigrants from the United States to this country; though a small
proportion of the outlay for transportation of emigrants from Europe has
been borne, with a view to assist those who would not otherwise have the
means of getting to Brazil. There is already, in Rio, an establishment
to which those without means are sent to be lodged and boarded free of
expense, until they can be forwarded to a colony. In these government
colonies roads are opened, houses of small size are built, and churches,
schools, priests, and a director are provided; but if it is the desire
of the colonists to furnish their own schools and churches, it is not
here prohibited; yet, if the churches are other than those of the Roman
Catholic religion, they cannot be built with a steeple or other
ostensible indication of a house of worship. Mirabile dictu!

I stated to Dom Galvão that there were many people of good standing in
the southern portion of the United States, who were able to provide land
and the means of subsistence for themselves, and yet would find great
inconvenience in affecting the transportation across the ocean, unless
some systematic means of assistance could be devised by the Brazilian
government. There will be also persons, doubtless, desirous of coming to
Brazil, whose means are very much reduced, and yet their former
associations in life would render them desirable companions to those
having more resources; and if those without means could receive the
assistance extended to the colonists by the government, and yet be
allowed to join their friends in a settlement of their own, it would
materially facilitate their location in this country.

If the Brazilian government will render the same aid to our emigrants
who are without means that has been extended to her own colonists, it
would find at the end of six months that all further outlay or
responsibility was unnecessary; and these people would co-operate with
those having resources, to build up and make useful all the industrial
enterprises of the settlement.

To furnish lands at the lowest practicable rate, and construct public
highways, without any duty upon importations, are at present proposed by
the government of Brazil, as encouragement to emigration.

Dom Galvão proposed to represent my views upon the subject of emigration
to the Minister of Agriculture, and expressed his conviction that some
practicable scheme would be devised to effect our object of being
associated together, under regulations that would be satisfactory to all
concerned.

Mr. Davis called with me also to see Mr. Milford, Acting Consul of the
United States, by whom I was courteously treated, and informed that a
large body of land had been intrusted to his charge, located near the
Dom Pedro II. railroad. He stated that papers were in his possession
giving full particulars of its nature and resources, and that they might
be seen by calling at his office, No. 28 Rua Del Alfandega.

I was then presented to Mr. James, No. 15 Rua da Direita, and had a
conversation with him as to the settlement of Dr. Blue and others, near
the Bay of Paranagua. He informed me that Mr. Wells, of St. Louis, had
gone on a visit to that locality, and was expected to return in a few
days, when all available information might be had from him. I had
requested Dom Galvão to make arrangements for me to visit that region,
but no further steps will be taken until I hear the report of Mr. Wells.

There are some private interests involved, which have enlisted parties
as advocates of the lands in the vicinity of the Bay of Paranagua; and I
doubt whether it is desirable to look at a country where those expecting
to speculate in lands have already made investments with a view to sell
again.


                                         SATURDAY, _September 16, 1865_.

Learning from Mr. James that Mr. Wells had returned to the city, I
accepted his offer to give me an introduction to him. He gave me the
particulars of the bay, and the river extending up from it, with an
account of the recent settlements near that place, conveying rather a
favorable idea of the surroundings of the Bay of Paranagua; yet I found
that he was not so favorably impressed as to think of making his home
there.

I concluded accordingly that it would not perhaps suit as a location for
me and my friends; and that the advantages of other localities would be
investigated without visiting this place at present.

Having heard from several disinterested persons that the province of São
Paulo combined fertility of soil and adaptation especially to the
culture of coffee, with a pleasant and healthy climate, I was inclined
to think very favorably of that region. Upon an examination of its
outline on the map it was found that it extended sufficiently towards
the north to afford all the tropical fruits, and that its southern limit
would secure a mitigation of heat, without being exposed to much frost
during the winter, lying between 19° 38′ and 25° 39′ south latitude.

Under these circumstances I withdrew my application for transportation
to the Bay of Paranagua, and asked Dom Galvão to arrange for a visit to
the province of São Paulo.

He had been down to see me, and not finding me in, had left a paper,
embodying modifications of the regulations pertaining to emigrants,
which are intended to carry out my views. Upon having this document,
written in Portuguese, translated by Mr. Hagins, it did not seem very
definite or satisfactory, and I will confer with the author in person,
when we meet again on Monday at his office. Then I will get more precise
information as to the points submitted in this paper, and can determine
whether any practical benefit is likely to accrue from the acceptance of
his propositions.

Mr. Mallory and myself were expected at the office of Major Pedro Latão
da Cunha, at 11 o’clock a. m., but, failing to have the papers in
readiness, we did not reach there until after 12 o’clock, when he had
left, and we were fully conscious of our dereliction. As we returned,
however, he hailed us from the opposite side of the street; and on
speaking with him, we found that he had been to learn the cause of our
failure to meet him. This made us notice the great importance of
promptness and punctuality in keeping our appointments with officials.
He proposed that we should call at his office on Monday at 12 o’clock,
when he would go with us to see the Minister of State, and endeavor to
have our applications acted upon forthwith.

Though there is no special consequence attached to the disposition that
is made of mine, it is of great moment to Mr. Mallory to get a speedy
and favorable response to his application.

My understanding with different parties as to matters of business,
indicates that I may, in a short time, ascertain definitely something as
to the lands that may be available; and learn further my future
relations to this government.


                                           SUNDAY, _September 17, 1865_.

In compliance with a previous understanding, Mr. Mallory and myself went
immediately after breakfast to Captain Buhlaw’s quarters, on one of the
highest hills in the city, whence he and his wife accompanied us to the
museum. This visit was made to-day, as we were informed that it was open
only upon Sundays.

We examined a very extensive collection in the departments of
Ornithology and Herpatology, with a fair assortment of minerals, of
which the specimens of native diamond engaged my special attention.
There was a very interesting variety of coins of different nations, and
also some specimens of paper money, among which I observed a one dollar
($1.00) greenback note, and others of smaller denomination of the United
States currency. These certainly have very little claim to a place among
coins, except as curiosities.

In the collection of fishes, I observed a very badly-prepared specimen
of flying fish, and were it not for the great interest my friends will
take in one preserved by me on the voyage across the water, it might be
presented to this museum, so that the characteristics of this truly
remarkable phenomenon could be appreciated.

Among the various specimens of cotton, those from the United States had
precedence; yet there are several samples of cotton grown in Brazil
which are nearly as good as those grown in the Southern States, and with
proper culture this staple will doubtless be still more improved, as the
climate is thought to be well adapted to its production.

There was quite a number of very fine specimens of coffee, the best of
which were marked as being produced in Brazil. There is a great
difference in the appearance of the samples from various sections of
this country; and this goes to confirm the idea that many brands of
coffee receive their names from the merchants here, or at the points to
which they are imported. Persons of fastidious taste may thus have
Mocha, Java, Laguayra, &c., &c., all coming from Rio, and yet leave a
larger proportion to bear the appropriate name of this place. I know
from personal experiment on one occasion, that deception in this respect
is not difficult. Three specimens of coffee—the Mocha, Java, and Rio, so
called—were all served in my house to a party of friends, and the
vessels containing each specially noted by my wife. After the experiment
of each, all the party concurred in pronouncing that which was known
only to her to be Rio coffee as the best of the three; and were quite
surprised when told that they had overlooked the supposed fine qualities
of the other specimens. If they had been informed in advance what name
was borne by each pot of coffee, doubtless the antipathy to Rio coffee
would have manifested itself by condemning this article. But not knowing
the quality contained by either of them, the verdict was rendered
according to their real taste; and acting upon the suggestion, a bag of
this was purchased, that proved to be really excellent coffee. I have
met an Englishman here who says they don’t drink Rio coffee in London,
and yet I am told that large cargoes are shipped to England.

After concluding our observations of the cabinet specimens, we made a
tour of the general and special curiosities that are here gathered from
all parts of the world. Several Egyptian relics in the form of mummies
are here exhibited, and various antiquarian souvenirs from Pompeii[7]
and other places of historic fame. Many very showy garments used by the
Indians of this country in by-gone days, and their implements for the
capture of game, or for purposes of war, were presented for our
examination and admiration.

I was quite interested in an immense living eagle, that attracted
attention by frequently uttering a most harsh squall; and while other
specimens of large birds show what they have been, this affords a
present exemplification of vigorous animated existence. From the remnant
of a chicken seen in the cage, I infer that the daily bill of fare is
quite costly.

After leaving the museum, I went with Captain Buhlaw and his wife, in an
omnibus, out on the line of railroad towards Tijuca, for a distance of
four miles, and saw along the way many things of interest. This seems to
be the most desirable portion of the suburbs of the city for the
residences of private families, whose business does not confine them to
the more densely populated streets. There is much taste displayed in
some of the buildings and yards, and several really elegant improvements
have been recently completed. The dwellings have, for the most part,
large gardens attached, with a combination of the useful and ornamental,
in the plants and shrubbery, rendering them quite attractive.

The majestic palm tree is seen standing in quiet dignity amidst the more
unpretending and yet more useful growths of orange, banana, mamon, and
the ajaca. This valley, lying between the mountain ridges on either
side, is a level plain, with a clear stream of water running throughout
its entire length. Much of the territory is not yet built up, and the
lots are offered for sale by posting placards upon them, with the
Portuguese words, Vende—se. This precinct is to the city of Rio de
Janeiro what the vicinity of Central Park was to New York before its
improvements were completed; and the day is not far distant when this
route to Tijuca will become the most charming residence around the city.
The soil seems to be well suited to the growth of vegetables, and I
observed that they were receiving more systematic culture here than
elsewhere, being grown, doubtless, for the market.

As the line of railroad to the small retreat of Tijuca is merely for the
accommodation of persons residing there, and along the route, it affords
most convenient and prompt transportation at stated hours, and thus
makes the distance a matter of small moment to those living in this
region.

Having learned that there would be preaching to-night at the Episcopal
church, which is the only service in the English language in the city, I
got directions to the place, and Mr. Mallory and I set out in search of
it. By the use of an extemporized phrase of Portuguese, “Onde está
Ygreza Ingliza?” I was enabled to find the house of worship. The service
had already commenced when we arrived, and it gave an entirely orthodox
exposition of the plan of salvation. The minister urged the acceptance
of the Lord Jesus Christ, as our Saviour, upon all who had not yet laid
hold of the promises of the gospel.

After leaving a land of Protestantism, and coming into this Roman
Catholic country, it is very refreshing and edifying to be once more
associated with Christians who hold the same great cardinal doctrines of
faith with myself. This building is a plain substantial meeting-house,
with none of the outward show of a church, and the interior presenting a
neat but unostentatious appearance. There was quite a peculiar
arrangement of the pulpit, at a considerable distance from the rear wall
of the house, and elevated so as to require a sort of stairway for the
ascent of the minister. The congregation was small, but consisting of
genteel-looking persons; and, from their physiognomy, I concluded them
to be chiefly English people, and certainly none of the Portuguese race.
The minister impressed me very favorably by his simplicity of manner.

Notwithstanding that Mr. Mallory has been raised as a Roman Catholic, he
remarked that this form of worship was more in accordance with his views
of Christianity than the parade which he observed in the Catholic
churches of this city; and that he expected to attend service with the
Episcopalians, at this church, during his stay here. I find that none of
our Catholics seem to have a favorable impression of the piety of their
brethren of the church in this city; and they, consequently, manifest no
inclination to hold fellowship with them in their ostentatious worship.

The demonstrations witnessed to-day in Rio show an utter disregard for
the solemnity of the Sabbath. A large body of volunteers in holiday
uniform, with a band of thirty musicians, were encountered early this
morning upon one of the principal streets. In the next place, quite a
number of soldiers, with their guns, badges, and flags, were seen
assembled in a most gorgeous church, for the celebration of high mass.
This ceremony was conducted with great pomp by the priest, and a large
number of dignitaries held lighted candles of most enormous proportions,
forming a concourse around the altar, which again was lighted up by
hundreds of candles, though it was in open day, with a clear bright sun
shedding its rays on all who would enjoy the light which God has given.

As we went in search of the English church this evening, we found a
large assemblage of persons in a public garden, drinking in groups at
tables arranged for the purpose, while a band was entertaining the party
with music, from a stand erected for their special accommodation.

Immediately adjoining this garden was a building, in which a circus was
performing, and we could hear the applause and laughter, such as might
be expected at a farce or comic exhibition.

The day seems to be regarded rather as a holiday for amusement, and yet
many of the business houses are kept open during the Sabbath, and there
is no law of the country requiring its observance as a day of rest from
labor, or to be kept holy to the Lord.

A great many of the people attend mass in the forenoon of Sunday, and
then join in any recreation that may be presented. It seems that the
theatres and opera houses regard Sunday evening as specially suited to
attract a large number of persons, and usually have their most
attractive pieces on such occasions.

In returning to-night from preaching, a large assemblage of negroes was
observed immediately upon the side of the street, and, upon entering the
building, we found it was a church for the exclusive use of the black
people. Here many were kneeling in front of the altar, while some
service was held by one of their own color; and, at a side stand, there
was another black personage, who furnished applicants with a small
printed paper, upon the payment of two coppers of the value of four
cents. Mr. Mallory said these were no doubt indulgences for some sin
committed, and the trade seemed to be going on prosperously. There were
no seats in this building, and those who did not kneel sat flat upon the
floor, as I have observed to be the case in all the services, when they
did not stand. The churches do not have seats, and perhaps there is no
regular discourse delivered to the congregations in this country.

So far as I am able to infer any thing of the spirit manifested in their
acts, I should regard the religion of the people in Rio as having very
little of the holy unction, and the natural tendency of a State
establishment is that of formality.


                                           MONDAY, _September 18, 1865_.

Immediately after breakfast this morning we called upon Dr. Bosworth,
who had been at our quarters on Saturday without seeing us. He desired
to apprise us of an appointment; that Major Pedro Latão da Cunha would
accompany us to-day at 12 o’clock to visit the Minister of State. Of
this we had already been apprised by the gentleman in person, and at the
hour specified we proceeded with him to the large public buildings where
this minister receives audience.

Captain Buhlaw having also an application for public service,
accompanied Mr. Mallory and myself, and was included with us in the kind
offices of presentation to Conselheiro Saraiva, the Minister of State
for the empire of Brazil. Next to the Emperor, he is the highest
dignitary of the land, and in his absence at the seat of war, this
official takes charge of matters that are intended for the special
consideration of the Emperor. We were received by him with every mark of
attention and consideration; and the interview terminated with an
assurance that each of us would receive the appointments as desired.[8]
He said, farther, that our applications were favorably considered, not
so much from any demand for our services, as that the empire of Brazil
wished to extend this recognition and appreciation of our motives, in
coming to this country as a place of residence.

The prompt and definite hearing given to our respective claims impressed
me very favorably with the business character of the minister, and his
courteous manner lead us to entertain a high regard for him. Pursuant to
a prior appointment, I called at the office of Mr. Milford to-day, to
examine the papers pertaining to a tract of three thousand acres of
land, lying near the Dom Pedro II. railroad, and within an hour’s run of
the city of Rio de Janeiro. The price twenty-four thousand dollars,
which makes it eight dollars per acre.

The place is represented as being under cultivation in rice and
sugar-cane, and as having a fair outfit of farming implements, with
cattle, for a limited sphere of operations. It is represented as adapted
to the culture of coffee, cotton, corn, sugar-cane, and rice. I am
further informed, by another party, that it is an old plantation very
much exhausted, and every thing very much out of repair, so that it is
not likely to meet the expectations which the glowing description in Mr.
Milford’s hands is calculated to induce.

We called upon Mr. James E. Crenshaw, formerly of Richmond, Virginia, at
the Exchange Hotel, during the afternoon, and had a very pleasant social
interview with him. The past and the present of the South was discussed
and considered, in regard to the future of our people in the midst of
the circumstances by which they are surrounded. He said that he had been
written to by many of his friends while in England, representing the
many difficulties of their situation; but he had not been able to give
them any advice as to the course it would be best to pursue at present.
It would afford him much satisfaction to know what are the inducements
presented to agriculturists in the interior of this country, and he
requested me to inform him as to the result of my investigations.

We took a stroll this evening into the fashionable and showy business
mart of Rua d’Ouvidor. This name implies a street of hearing, and was
given originally from being the location of the courts for hearing and
deciding litigated cases. It is, however, at present the street for
seeing, and, with the ladies, for being seen. As those of elegance and
refinement usually select the evening to do their shopping, this
brilliantly illuminated thoroughfare affords the most favorable
opportunity for an inspection of the better class of women. They may be
seen making purchases, in the finely furnished store-rooms, or looking
in upon the rich show-windows from the side-walks. These gaudy windows
are not only supplied with extra gas-lights, but have mirrors on the
outside, reflecting the dazzling brightness upon the articles for
exhibition, and the glare is almost equal to the light of the sun.

My limited opportunity for seeing the ladies of elegance does not
warrant the expression of any opinion as to their general appearance;
but it is fair to infer, that some of those seen at different times and
various places present the common characteristics of the sex; and there
has been a marked deficiency of beauty on the part of those coming under
my observation. I must allow, however, that they dress with good taste.
There seems to be a partiality for black with ladies, as well as
gentlemen, in this city; and both sexes are entirely free from that
display of rich colors which is said to be characteristic of the Spanish
people.

Gentlemen and ladies here manifest no disposition to ostentatious
display, and yet seem to have a just appreciation of neatness and even
elegance in their attire. The high-crowned slick beaver hat, which is
vulgarly known among us as “stove-pipe,” is the usual head-dress of the
Brazilian gentleman; and indeed this style of hat is generally worn by
the respectable business men of the city. A slouch hat, such as is worn
by business men in the United States, is not often seen here; and,
though the panama hat is used by those who travel or go much in the sun,
I have not seen a single specimen of what is called the tropical hat. In
lieu of this cool and very appropriate style of hat, all persons who go
out upon the street carry neat silk umbrellas to protect them from the
sun, and to be used also in case of rain. An umbrella seems to be the
“vade mecum” of a gentleman here; and if a friend finds you without an
umbrella when going out from his house, he insists upon loaning one to
you, so that it becomes a matter of courtesy to others to supply
yourself with this accompaniment of almost all classes of men. This
serves as a good and useful substitute for the walking-cane, or the
riding-whip, so frequently carried needlessly by our people.


                                          TUESDAY, _September 19, 1865_.

This day has been devoted to looking round the city, and becoming
acquainted with some of the prominent localities, in this extended area
of widely-diversified scenery.

There are quite a number of conspicuous elevations within the corporate
limits of the city, which are now occupied by private dwellings, and are
considered the most desirable localities for families, both in regard to
health and the pleasant breeze which reaches them, while the air below
is close and warm. In the bay there are several islands, which afford
desirable homes for families likewise; and on the margins of the water,
around the borders of the city, there are many little nooks which afford
quiet retreats from the stir and confusion of the business thoroughfares
of the city. Botafogo and Praia Grande are among the most notable of
these, and the former is especially captivating for private dwellings.

Across the water again is found the abode of numerous persons doing
business in the city, besides constituting the residence of a
considerable population, who belong to the place, and remain there
permanently in various industrial occupations.

Receiving an invitation from Dr. Raney, the chief of the Ferry Company,
to take a ride with him on one of the boats, we crossed the bay to the
town of Nitherohi; and learned that this was entirely distinct from the
city of Rio, being the capital of the province of Rio de Janeiro, and
having its own independent municipal regulations. San Domingos
constitutes an adjunct to this, and is the seat of numerous factories of
cigarettes, while it is a most attractive home for private families.

There are two landings, at which these boats stop, and the number of
persons getting on and off, morning and evening, are almost equal to
that of the New York and Brooklyn ferry boats. There is not, however,
such a continuous passing during the day and night, though a single boat
finds profitable employment until 12 o’clock at night.

The fee for ferriage during the day is six cents. This is doubled from
dark until 9 o’clock, when it is again doubled until 10 o’clock, and
from this until 12 o’clock the last is doubled, making the fare fifty
cents. Thus persons who keep late hours, attending theatres, balls, or
parties in the city, are taxed with extra fare to return to their homes,
and it must have some effect towards inducing men to remain with their
own families during the evenings.

It is an interesting fact that these boats, being similar to the
double-enders of New York, should have been brought across the ocean
from the United States by their own engines; and though they were in a
gale, and got separated on the way, they suffered but little damage, and
reached here in good condition for service. Besides the two that steamed
out, there was a third brought upon the water, by a temporary rigging of
sails. The whole was superintended by Dr. Raney in person, and indicates
much energy and business capacity on his part. There is another boat,
which was purchased in Rio, and has been remodelled so as to suit this
special service, but it is not yet ready to go upon the line of the
ferry company.

The daily receipts on this line of ferry boats are not usually less than
four hundred dollars, which no doubt covers the wear and tear, with
interest on the capital, and leaves a large net income. Yet the payments
required for putting every thing in thorough order has prevented large
dividends to stockholders.

The Corcovado mountain is the highest accessible point around the city,
and having a road to its summit, the visitor finds there seats for his
comfort, and enjoys a view of all the surroundings of the city. Upon the
slope at the foot of this mountain is a country which is resorted to by
the curious, and presents many elaborate works of art, mingled with the
beauties of nature, to grace the last resting-place of man’s frail body.

One of the most conspicuous features of the populated portion of the
city is the signal telegraph at the observatory, upon the elevated Morro
do Castillo. Here, a flag pole with arms and cords, for the attachment
of various signals, stands in bold relief above the busy throng of
people; and when a vessel is seen to approach from the ocean, such flags
are raised as indicate to all the initiated what is the character of the
vessel, and from whence she comes, usually two or three hours before her
arrival. Upon this hill is also located the military hospital, which has
the reputation of being a remarkably well-regulated establishment, for
the treatment of those connected with the public service.

The monastery is a very extensive structure located upon the Morro San
Antonio, and, being far above the ordinary haunts of the population,
affords the monks comparative exemption from any of the annoyances of
their fellowmen.

Upon the Morro de São Bento is located the convent, for the
accommodation of the Sisters of Charity, and here, I am informed, quite
a large number of nuns are congregated, as a place of perpetual
seclusion from the snares and temptations that are supposed to beset the
sex in this sinful world.

Among the elevations of celebrity, either for their public occupation or
as the residence of persons of distinction, are the Morro da Gloria,
Morro do Senado, and the Morro do Livramento.

While Rome is known as the city of seven hills, this designation might
also be most appropriately applied to Rio de Janeiro, as her hills are
the greatest attractions of the place, affording a delightful variety of
scenery. Leaving the heights we may descend to the plains, and note some
of the public establishments of most interest.

In the central portion of the broad level plain, upon which the business
population of Rio is located, the Quartel des Municipals Permanentes is
found, with all the structures and conveniences for administering the
affairs of the city.

The public offices of the ministers and officials of government of the
empire are situated upon the western border of an open space, called the
Praca de Acclamacão, or the Campo de Santa Anna. On the south side of
this space is the neat and yet modest-looking Congress Hall of the
deputies of the empire. On the north side, in connection with the
densely populated portion of the city, stands the large museum, of which
mention has already been made at a former date. The street running to
the east of this campo has upon the opposite side a large number of
stores, with several buildings, in which there are apartments for the
public officials of the government.

In the middle of this grand plaza stands a large opera house, which is
the great resort of the common people throughout the city.

This magnificent piece of ground, commonly called the campo, lies quite
unimproved as yet; and the washerwomen of the vicinity congregate here
to use the fountains of water with which it is supplied, and to spread
out their clothes upon the green grass that covers its surface. It will
ere long receive the attention of the authorities, and be laid out in
walks and decorated with flowers and evergreens, and must become a very
attractive resort for the pent-up population of this metropolital
rendezvous of all the nations of earth. It is only recently that much
interest has been manifested in ornamental public grounds, and the
Botanic Gardens, with other more central spots of land, already show the
taste of a progressive administration, in beautifying and adorning the
rural loveliness of nature by the chaste hand of art.

The most elaborate improvement to be seen in the city of Rio is the
exquisitely executed equestrian statue of Dom Pedro Primeira, which
stands in the middle of the Praca da Constituicão. The first Emperor is
represented in full military costume on horseback, and with the scroll
of the constitution raised aloft in one hand, while the other grasps the
reins of the bridle.

The pedestal has upon its four sides, respectively, four pairs of
Indians, with animals and reptiles, representing the regions named upon
the corresponding faces. This portion of the structure has inscribed
upon it, likewise, the principal rivers of the empire, arranged with
relation to the localities indicated; and thus affords a historic
picture of the country, with its geographical features, brought into one
interesting group.

The base is made of neatly-hewn granite, and comports admirably with the
massive elegance of the whole device. There are two small reservoirs of
water, with a “jet d’eau” at some distance from the statue, upon each
side of the square; and the artificial vines and foliage, with colored
flowers, look so true to nature, that persons are very prone to suppose
they have grown in the water. The grounds are laid out with excellent
taste, and enclosed by a neat iron fence, giving an air of completeness
and uniqueness that is eminently becoming to the subject.

Notwithstanding this handsome testimonial to the first Emperor indicates
that he had endeared himself to his people, so as to make them feel
pride in honoring his memory, yet his policy was so contrary afterwards
to the wishes of his subjects, that he was under the necessity of
abdicating his throne, and left the country to end his days in Portugal.

His lineal descendant, the present Emperor, succeeded him, and entered
upon the exercise of his high functions, having a regent to officiate in
the performance of the responsible public duties of the empire at the
outset, and subsequently administering all his business with the most
enlightened regard for the interests of his people.

It must be a source of painful reflection to every Brazilian, in looking
upon this statue, to think that the original could not be sustained by
the people who had placed him in authority, and though, like Washington,
he may live in the hearts of his countrymen, his grave rests not upon
his own soil, as that of the great North American.


                                        WEDNESDAY, _September 20, 1865_.

A communication was received quite unexpectedly, yesterday evening, from
Dom Antonio Paula Sonsa, Minister of Agriculture, inviting me to meet
him this morning, at ten o’clock, at his house, number nine, Rua da
Joanna.

Taking a hack, I proceeded to his residence at the time specified, and,
upon entering, quite an awkward scene ensued, as neither understood the
language of the other, and there was no interpreter present. Making an
attempt to converse in French did not relieve our embarrassment, as my
stock of the language was too limited to understand or to make myself
understood in that tongue. At length, he wrote, at my suggestion, in
French, that a gentleman who spoke English would arrive shortly to act
as interpreter. Understanding this, I took a seat, and remained quietly
until the interpreter came. Our intercourse being now made easy, he
desired to know my views and wishes in regard to the measures that might
promote the emigration of my friends to Brazil. I told him that the
object of visit was to look for a home for my own family, and to make an
examination of the country, with a view to report the result for the
information of other families, whose unfortunate situation in the South
induced them to desire a change of residence, and, in like manner with
myself, hoped that a desirable location might be found in this country.
He expressed a great desire to encourage the class of people to whom I
referred, and said that he would take the matter at once into
consideration, and devise a plan for assisting those who were desirous
of coming to Brazil from the Southern States.

In the mean time, he proposed to render me all the aid in his power for
a thorough examination of the country; and, as I had already concluded
to visit the province of São Paulo, he informed me that a ticket would
be furnished me to go by the steamer to-morrow to Santos, and that he
would supply me with letters to the President of the province, and to
other influential persons in different parts of the country. He told me
that passage would be furnished likewise to an interpreter, if one could
be secured, and that he would provide in like manner for any friend I
might desire to accompany me on the expedition. He further stated, that
under his direction to the President of the province, all the requisite
facilities would be afforded to me by him, for my exploration of the
lands lying in the interior of the province, and expressed a wish that I
might find there a suitable location for myself and my friends.

I learned in the course of the conversation that the minister comes from
the province of São Paulo; and, therefore, perhaps he feels more
interest in giving encouragement to an investigation of that region,
than if my examination was directed to some other quarter. My
predilection for this locality being entirely independent of any
partiality on the part of the minister, I will yet gladly avail myself
of the advantages which may accrue from this fact, and with the offer of
assistance in making a thorough exploration, I will, for the present,
suspend all further action in regard to an appointment in the Hospital
Department, and devote myself to this examination of the lands and
resources of this fertile province.

The gentleman who acted as interpreter is the secretary of the Minister
of Agriculture, and it was understood that he would bring to-morrow
morning, to my quarters, the letters and other papers with which I am to
be provided for making this tour of examination.

The ticket for passage upon the steamer was given to me to-day; and all
the necessary indorsements and stamps put upon my passport at the
treasury and police offices. I can now proceed with my personal
preparations for getting off to-morrow, and will notify Major da Cunha
of my leaving, so that he may take such steps as he may think proper, in
regard to the paper which was to be prepared for the other mission. No
calculation can be made as to the length of time I may be engaged in the
examination of these lands, and my intention is to make a full report of
all my observations, as a guide to my friends and others who may be
interested in the resources of this country.

The residence of Senor Dom Antonio Paula Sonsa, Minister of Agriculture,
is in the precinct of São Christovão, and near the palace of the
Emperor, where his family reside. But my pressing duties did not admit
of any delay to visit the royal abode, and I must reserve the privilege
of paying my respects to his majesty for a future occasion. I feel,
however, no special inclination to wait upon the Emperor, unless
business should require me to see him, and his time and patience are
doubtless sufficiently taxed here with visits of mere formality. As he
is absent at the seat of war just now, all the matters of business that
would have taken me to see him will probably be disposed of by his
ministers, and there will be no need to see him.[9]

On the way to São Christovão, I passed the grand butcher pen of the
city, which monopolizes the slaughtering of the cattle for the market.
It is a large establishment, with spacious grounds, and a high cast-iron
fence, having a gate of huge proportions with portals of hewn stone.

There is a tannery connected with, or adjacent to, this slaughtering
establishment, and the large number of hides are thus turned immediately
into the vats of the tanner. This place, called the “Cortuma de Mello e
Sonza e Campo,” is represented as being a very fine combination of
appliances for treating the hides in all the different stages of
tanning, using the bark and leaves of native trees for the supply of
ooze, by which the leather is tanned.

Though I could not stop to examine this tannery to-day, I was delayed
opposite the gate of the slaughter-house, contrary to my wishes, for the
driver of the diligence to blow up passengers for the return trip to the
city, and received the above general report in regard to the same.

The conductor of this diligence used a brass horn to give the signal for
departure and stopping, and when approaching a point where persons were
expected, he blew continuously until the spot was reached; or if there
was not a full cargo present, the bugle was used vigorously, as in this
place, to hurry up all who might desire to take seats. Some of these
omnibuses are fully entitled to the name, as they carry everybody with
their families, being suited to the accommodation of forty persons at
one time. I took a seat upon the outside, where I could see the various
points of interest presented by the slopes of the mountain side and the
improvements on the plain below.


                                         THURSDAY, _September 21, 1865_.

Having completed my personal arrangements for setting out this morning
to São Paulo, a very puzzling difficulty arose, by the failure to get my
papers from the Minister of Agriculture, and, for a time, I thought of
postponing the trip. It occurred to me, however, that the letters could
be forwarded by mail, and as my passage was secured for this steamer, I
took a row-boat, and paying one dollar for myself and baggage, was soon
aboard of the Santa Maria steamer.

We remained at the anchorage nearly two hours after the time appointed
for leaving, and upon stopping at the police station for examination of
papers, I was pleased to find my friend Job, who had been sent by Mr.
Davis, with the package of letters and documents from the Minister of
Agriculture. The boatmen took advantage of this express service to
charge two dollars and a half for bringing Job down, which, however, I
paid very cheerfully, as the papers were very important to accompany me
on arrival at the city of São Paulo.

My passport was examined by the police officer and returned to me,
whereupon I secured my berth, and made myself quiet for the voyage to
Santos.

The Santa Maria is a steam packet with two masts arranged for sails, and
having side-wheels, with her aft deck covered by an awning, so as to
make this position very pleasant for passengers. Her eating-saloon is
large and airy upon the first floor, and the apartment, with spacious
state-rooms, is below this, and has large ports by which the ventilation
is effected very satisfactorily. Though each of the state-rooms has four
berths, I, fortunately, had an entire state-room, which, rendered my
passage very pleasant. My impressions of the general construction of
this steamer, and her adaptation to the accommodation of passengers as
well as freight, are decidedly favorable to the progress of Brazil in
the art of building vessels. Though her engines are of English make, I
am informed that all the work of constructing this steamer was done in
Rio de Janeiro; and she is not only substantial and well-modelled, but
finished in all her parts with good taste.

The management of those in charge of the Santa Maria looks to the
cleanliness and neatness of every thing, and the bedding was found in
excellent condition, while the fare was of good quality and very well
prepared. All the regime of the packet was satisfactory to me, and yet
there are some proceedings at the table which seem unnecessary, and
especially the change of plates for each different article that is
eaten. Those who desire several things upon a plate at the same time,
indulge their taste of course; and as variety is the spice of life with
me, I paid but little attention to the rule observed by most of the
Brazilians, in making frequent changes of plates at breakfast as well as
at dinner.

The demonstrative character of this people is strikingly illustrated at
their meals, as each man calls out for any thing not within his reach,
or even rises to his feet and reaches over the table for what is wanted
by himself, or another, at a distant part of the table. Every one is
expected to supply himself as far as practicable.

Persons who concluded their meals, and did not care to wait for those
seated on the bench upon either side of them, crept under the table, and
made their way out at the opposite side, where there was no wall to be
encountered.

Wine is an invariable accompaniment of dinner, and after all is
concluded, it is the custom to serve coffee without milk.

The custom of this country recognizes but two meals a day—breakfast
being from eight to nine o’clock A. M., and dinner from four to five
o’clock P. M. But it is usual to have a cup of coffee upon rising in the
morning, and a cup of tea, with crackers or fancy cakes, is taken at
night.

Tea is generally taken for breakfast by the Brazilians, and when I made
inquiry at the breakfast table for a cup of coffee, it had to be made
before it could be furnished. The cups here are exceedingly small,
holding but little more than an ordinary wine-glass; and the coffee or
tea is made strong in an increase ratio to the size of the receptacle,
which suits my taste very well, as I have no fancy for long coffee, by
which term the Brazilians style it when very weak.

My isolated position among strangers, whose language was unknown to me,
was relieved by meeting aboard Senor Antonio de Barros, to whom I had
been introduced at the house of the Minister of Agriculture. He speaks
English, so as to carry on conversation very well, though he seems to be
impressed with a sense of his deficiency in the use of the language. I
found him quite kindly disposed, and in all respects a gentleman. He
assisted me in making known my wants at the table, and on other
occasions, giving me also a correct pronunciation of the few Portuguese
words which I had acquired for necessary purposes. He proved to be a
very genial and intelligent associate during the voyage, and gave me
important items of information in regard to the province of São Paulo,
in which he resides. He is a brother-in-law of Dom Antonio Paula Sonsa,
the Minister of Agriculture, and his father is Baron of Rerecicoba, so
that his associations are the best of the land. Having received his
education as an engineer in Germany, he speaks that language and French
as well as his native tongue, the Portuguese. His knowledge of English
has been obtained from teachers and reading, without any opportunity of
associating with people speaking the language. Under these
circumstances, I was surprised that he should have so good a
pronunciation and conception of the English language.

There was a young Portuguese aboard of the steamer who also spoke some
English, and manifested a disposition to assist me in getting a
vocabulary of Portuguese words. His pronunciation of English, however,
was very defective, and frequently I could not understand what he
attempted to say to me, which made our intercourse rather embarrassing.

There was a sleight-of-hand operator on the vessel, who afforded
considerable entertainment by his tricks, with a small ivory ball and a
cup or stand with a cover, in which this and other articles would be
placed and removed at will, without any one being able to detect the
process.

Our steamer kept in sight of land throughout the entire route, and
occasionally passed between an island of rock and the shore, giving a
fine view on each side.


                                           FRIDAY, _September 22, 1865_.

After a late breakfast, most of the passengers repaired to the deck,
where comfortable seats were arranged for their accommodation. The
atmosphere was quite cool, and with a brisk wind, I felt as if my
overcoat would be acceptable, but being interested in the scenery I did
not care to go below for the purpose of getting it, and I walked to and
fro upon the deck, so as to keep my blood in active circulation. I was,
perhaps, the only man who did not smoke, and most of them were using the
cigarettes made of the corn husk, containing tobacco, which are very
much in use here by all classes of people. In the Portuguese language
this is called cigar, while our article of that name is called cherotte.
The snuff is ordinarily called tobacco here, and the article for chewing
fumo, thus changing all our terms in the Portuguese language.

We approached the harbor of Santos shortly after ten o’clock A. M., and
the low flat land upon our left, forming a part of the large island upon
which the city stands, was in striking contrast to the towering hills
upon our right hand.

The fort, which is intended to guard the entrance to the harbor, is upon
the mainland on the right as we approach. It is a rude stone work of
small dimensions, with guns of small calibre in barbette, which would
not prove effective in arresting a vessel of war that might attempt to
move upon the city. This antiquated-looking fort was evidently
constructed prior to the advance in fortifications, which has been made
in the last quarter of a century. It is not such a work as should be
relied upon by a nation actually at war with a power which has shown
much reckless daring and considerable enterprise. All are aware that a
vessel of the Brazilian government was captured by the Paraguayans, in
the very commencement of hostilities, and that they have had armed
vessels of war upon the waters, which might leave the immediate scene of
operations, and make an attack at other more vulnerable points. It is to
be hoped, however, that the determined policy of the Emperor will soon
bring this war with Paraguay to a successful close.

Upon landing at Santos, I found a city that resembled in many respects
the business portion of Rio, and having in the store-rooms large
supplies of coffee and cotton. The streets are somewhat wider than those
of Rio, but there is less activity in every department of business, and
all the people looked as if there was plenty of time to accomplish
whatever they had to do. Some of the buildings near the wharf have quite
an antiquated appearance, and are doubtless remnants of the early
settlement of this place, which was among the first of the country. Near
this city is the famous São Vicente, where Martino Affonso founded the
first colony that landed from Portugal, in 1532; but the port has become
obstructed by sand, and it remains an insignificant village.

Having a letter from Dr. Henry C. Bosworth to Mr. W. T. Wright, of
Santos, I proceeded to his business house, where he received me with
respectful cordiality, and kindly invited me to his residence. I
informed him of my expectation to proceed at an early hour next morning,
and that it would be preferable to retain my quarters at the Hotel de
Millen, where my baggage was ordered to be left. His invitation to take
dinner, and make the acquaintance of his family, being accepted, he
despatched a young man to see that my trunk reached the hotel in safety
from the steamer, while we engaged in conversation as to the aspects of
affairs in the South. He has been a modern advocate of our cause during
the struggle, and sympathizes with us in our misfortunes.

My visit to the family of Mr. Wright was marked by such kind
consideration, as to make me feel like I was again amongst old friends.
His wife is a native of this country, but speaks English fluently, and
has few of the characteristics, in person or manner, of the ladies of
Brazil. They have two rosy-cheeked little boys, with fair complexion and
sprightly dispositions, who seemed to regard me as one of the family.

I was much interested in looking around his very extensive grounds, and
had an opportunity of tasting the guava fruit from which the favorite
jelly is made. Here I saw, for the first time, the coffee tree bearing
berries; and the prospect for a fair yield was favorable, though the
trees had not received the attention requisite for the best result. The
berries are at first green, then red, and afterwards black; the exterior
capsule including two grains, with their flat sides in opposition. The
tree bears some resemblance to the crape myrtle, and the berries are
arranged in clusters along the small branches, from which they are
stripped with the hand when ripe, as indicated by becoming dark.

In the afternoon I joined Mr. Wright in a ride upon horseback, across
the level flat land lying between his place and the beach. This ground
is covered with a low scrubby growth, and the soil has the appearance of
being well adapted to the growth of rice, and perhaps also of sea island
cotton.

In the vicinity of Santos, rice has been produced more successfully than
in any other portion of Brazil; and if these lands could be brought into
successful cultivation, their near proximity to the city would not only
afford a ready means of disposing of the crop, but various articles
might be procured to improve the soil for the production of other
articles. Along the beach there are several neat private dwellings, with
gardens attached to some of them, which present a very thriving aspect
of all the ordinary vegetables. In the premises of one gentleman we saw
also a very pretty variety of flowers and fancy shrubbery; and having a
neat iron railing, the place presented quite an attractive appearance.
These situations being some two miles from the city, with a good
sea-breeze, and a very fine sandy beach in front, of several miles in
extent, are the most desirable homes for families who have the means of
indulging this retreat from business associations.

After returning at dark from this ride, I accompanied Mr. and Mrs.
Wright to the house of a friend, where a small party was expected; and
though I acted as escort for Mrs. Wright, my arm was not tendered to her
as would have been expected with us, from the fact that I had learned
nothing as yet of the habits and customs of society in this country, and
had the general impression that the association of ladies with gentlemen
was much more restricted than in the United States. At this place I had
an opportunity of seeing a specimen of the social parties of the city;
but was, of course, unable to hold any conversation, except as Mr.
Wright interpreted between me and the gentleman of the house.
Accordingly I felt that my presence was likely to prove irksome to all
parties, and just as tea was announced, I excused myself at the risk of
appearing rude, and went to look after matters of business, which were
more in accordance with my inclination at this time.

Mr. Wright accompanied me, and presented me to Senor José Vergueiro, who
resides in the interior of the province of São Paulo, and has the
largest and best arranged coffee plantation in the country. He stated
that it would afford him great pleasure to aid me in examining the lands
of the province, and that he would cheerfully accompany me to see
different plantations in his own neighborhood. He informed me that
business engagements would necessarily detain him at Santos for several
days, but that he expected to proceed to the interior within a week, and
should I leave prior to that time, he would write in advance of going,
so as to secure me a proper reception upon visiting his place and others
in that section.

I was furnished with a letter by Mr. Wright to an uncle of his wife;
Senor João Bernardino V’ra Barboza, at São Pedro, in this province. He
has lands to dispose of himself, and will be able to refer me to others
having large estates that may be for sale.

Upon parting with my newly-acquired friend, Mr. Wright, whose
hospitality I enjoyed, he insisted that, on my return, I would make his
house my home, in true southern style. Appreciating the spirit of his
invitation, I of course accepted it.

Mr. Wright tells me that he has received some account of the lands and
water facilities at a small town upon the coast, called Conceicão, which
makes him suppose that it might be a matter of interest for me to visit
it. When I return to Santos, he thinks that he can accompany me to see
this place, and advises me not to make any definite arrangement
elsewhere, until I examine that locality.

Santos has a good harbor, and sufficient depth of water for vessels of
any magnitude. It is located upon an extended plane, which admits of
indefinite appropriations for buildings; and, with a full supply of
excellent drinking water, from the adjacent elevated grounds, there are
presented favorable conditions for a larger city at no distant day. The
railroad line already connecting this city with the city of São Paulo,
and in process of completion farther into the interior, will facilitate
very much the transportation of products to this point; which will
afford a market, or be the medium of communication with Rio de Janeiro.
Should the emigrants from the United States locate in the province of
São Paulo, this city, being the principal seaport, will become the
centre of trade, and must grow rapidly in all that pertains to business.

After my voyage through the country is completed, I may give my
attention to the examination of some of the improvements of this city,
which cannot be noticed now.

In this place, I may remark, that any extended travel in Brazil is
styled a voyage, though it be entirely upon land. In the account of the
tour upon horseback, made by the Emperor recently, across the province
of Rio Grande, to the seat of war, it was spoken of in the
_Anglo-Brazilian Times_ as voyaging through the country.


                                         SATURDAY, _September 23, 1865_.

Having enjoyed a comfortable night’s rest at the Hotel Millen, I awoke
at the early hour of 5 o’clock A. M. with the sound of a pelting rain
and howling wind. This precluded the thought of making an early move, as
had been anticipated; but I got a cup of coffee, and held myself in
readiness for any notice from the diligence. When the weather gave some
promise of improvement I ventured out, and learned from the man having
charge of transportation that it would be impracticable to take a boat
to the foot of the serra as he had expected, but that horses would be
provided and our baggage could be forwarded in carts. I ordered
breakfast in my best Portuguese vocabulary, and got it somewhat in
advance of the regular hour.

All things being in readiness, we set out about 9 o’clock A. M. for the
diligence station, which was some eight miles distant, at the foot of
the serra. Senor Barros and myself were on horseback, while his
brother-in-law, Dom Barros, and sister were in a chaise with two horses,
the extra animal being attached by a swingle-tree at one side of the
shafts. The driver was seated flat in the foot of the chaise, with his
legs out at one side, and urged his team forward at a good speed over
the rough turnpikes. We reached our destination about 11 o’clock A. M.,
and at this point we entered a substantial vehicle, styled here a
diligencia, intended for seating eight persons. There being but four of
us, and a small boy besides, we had ample room, and sufficient space for
the bandboxes also.

At the outset, seven horses were attached to the diligence, and a driver
on foot took charge of those in front, while one on the box drove the
four others that constituted the regular team. On the lesser slopes, and
the occasional level portions of the road, we went at a sweeping trot;
yet this pedestrian driver ran along with us at great apparent ease
until we reached the ridge of the serra, making a distance of six miles.
He then detached his three horses, which had been driven abreast in
front, and took them back to the station, while we proceeded with the
four-horse team upon a finely-gravelled road at a rapid gait.

The steep ascent of this mountain side is made by a zigzag road, which
is cut from the slopes of the cliffs, and paved with stones. At some
places there are precipices descending suddenly from the edge of the
road to great depths, so as to make the traveller feel serious
apprehensions for his passage along the rather narrow track of the road.
I was told that mules have been sometimes forced over these abrupt edges
into the awful gorge beneath, from the crowding of a large number into
these narrow places, and their utter destruction is of course
inevitable. There has been no instance, however, of any accident to the
diligencia, which run this route from day to day; and hence a sort of
guarantee of safety is afforded by this mode of conveyance, which is not
felt upon the newly-constructed railroad line, which ascends the serra
by inclined planes and stationary engines.

The deep gorges in the sides of the mountain have streams of water
running from the more elevated parts, and in one of these recesses there
is a cascade of much grandeur and sublimity. From the side of a cliff
covered with green foliage, this stream seems to gush forth, and dashing
downward with the greatest impetuosity from one ledge of rock to
another, it finally goes surging and boiling through the mountain gorge,
to form a tributary to the river below. I could not so far restrain my
utilitarian ideas, as to keep out the impression of the immense
water-power that might be wielded by this bold stream, were it situated
at a favorable point for the erection of machinery.

Somewhat more than half way up the slope of the serra, there is a most
enchanting view of the broad expanse of land and water around the city
of Santos. Rarely does it fall to the lot of man to occupy a position
more favorable for enjoying that fine contrast of mountain and plain,
which is presented in casting the eye upwards along the crest of the
serra, and then downwards over the placid and yet varied scene beneath,
with the ocean seen in the distance.

The variegated green foliage which envelopes the slopes of the serra is
a type of nature’s loveliness, and we may truly say of this grand
panorama that “Beauty unadorned is most adorned.”

Between Santos and the foot of the serra, nearly a thousand mules were
encountered, laden with coffee, cotton and other products of the
interior, going towards the city of Santos. Though I did not count those
which were passed after getting into the diligence, it is a fair
estimate that an equal number were met after leaving the station. Thus
we have about two thousand pack-mules, each carrying about two hundred
and twenty-five pounds of the products of the country, making their way
to Santos. Going in an opposite direction, there was perhaps an equal
number, that had delivered similar articles, and were now laden with
various kinds of merchandise for the consumption of the people in the
interior; or in some instances with pieces of machinery for the
improvement of their industrial appliances. In one instance, a mule was
carrying two immense boxes, which literally covered it from head to
tail.

It is much to be desired that this bungling mode of transportation will
ere long be supplanted by the opening of the railroad line from Santos
to São Paulo. It is said to be already completed; yet an accident upon
the line, on the occasion of a trial excursion some months since, has
perhaps served in part to induce the contractors to retain the use of
the road exclusively for forwarding the necessary articles of
construction for the portion of the line not yet finished. Not only is
the demand great for the transportation of freight, but there is now a
considerable amount of travel, which must at present avail itself of the
diligence line and submit to all the exactions they see fit to make. I
was told that the fare from Santos to São Paulo was fifteen millreas,
($7.50;) but in addition to this there was a charge of four millreas
($2.00) for a horse to ride to the foot of the serra, and a charge of
three millreas ($1.50) for the transportation of baggage, making
together twenty-two millreas, ($11.00.) The extras can be put on with
the monopoly of the means of transportation, but if we had the line of
cars upon the railroad, it would not only be cheaper, but more
expeditious, though from present indications the safety of the railroad
seems very problematical.

At the small village of São Bernardino, about half way from Santos to
São Paulo, there are two very neat-looking tea farms, which succeed as I
am informed in producing a very good article of tea. Really this is like
an oasis in the desert; for there is scarcely another redeeming feature
in the route from the serra to the city. If my estimation of the
resources of Brazil had to rest upon the soil along this road, I should
take no interest in locating here.

The ground in one particular locality was raised in mounds of various
size, from that of a potato-hill to the extent of earth thrown up in
burying a horse. This resulted from the operations of a species of ant
called here copina, and if the soil had been fit for any thing
previously, it would be rendered useless by the presence of these
insects in such immense numbers, as the entire surface for a
considerable area was covered with these hills of different proportions.

Besides this copina, there is another species of ant, called formica,
which is very destructive to vegetables throughout this region. They
burrow in the earth, at such depths, and by such circuitous channels, as
to render it impracticable to destroy them except by fumigation with
sulphureous gases, or other poisonous exhalations, that may be blown
with an air-pump or by a bellows into their dens. This class of ants is
said to be very troublesome in the agricultural districts of this
province, and they are perhaps the greatest obstacle to the success of
the planters in the cultivation of cotton, to which they are
particularly destructive.[10]

Notwithstanding the unpromising aspect of the lands generally, through
which we travelled, we had a fair assortment of substantials for our
dinner at the hack station, and especially was there a good supply of
the staple commodity of the country, feijão, which is a variety of beans
somewhat similar to our corn-field bean.

Our lady friend, who had been absent for some four years in France, had
not perhaps enjoyed an opportunity during her absence, or since her
return, to avail herself of the native feijão; and I was quite
interested to observe the evident relish with which she partook of these
beans.

On our route to-day we encountered a vestige of former days that is
still in use in many rugged parts of the country, called the banquet.

It consists of a sort of box, as the body of the carriage, having shafts
at each end, so that a mule may be placed in each, to bear the burden.
With this firm and apt support, one mule having his tail to the body,
and the other with his head towards the other end of it, progress is
made successfully over the most irregular and narrow roads. Women and
children are placed in this box-carriage and travel to any part of the
country in comparative comfort and safety, and should any portion of our
people go far into the interior, this is the mode of transportation
which must be relied upon for families, as carts and wagons cannot
travel over many of the roads in the country.

We reached São Paulo after dark, and I proceeded to the Hotel de Italia,
and was pleased to receive the salutation of the landlady in my own
language. She sent a servant with me to search for Mr. Preller and Mr.
Sampson, to whom I had letters of introduction, but neither of them was
found, and after returning, I went to my room. After sleeping until
after midnight, I was awoke by the sound of music and voices in the
house, and I could recognize the voice of our landlady, in the midst of
others, speaking in an excited and elevated strain. Being kept awake for
two hours, this did not seem in keeping with an orderly establishment,
and I concluded that my landlady was quite too fond of company and late
hours to suit my taste.


                                           SUNDAY, _September 24, 1865_.

The humiliating confession must be made, that I had not noted the return
of the Sabbath, and went out this morning for the purpose of doing some
shopping. There was no indication in the business aspects of the streets
that it was a day of rest, and it was only brought to my mind that I was
violating this holy day by a remark of my landlady referring to the day
of the week. I only bought, however, Vieyra’s small Portuguese and
English Dictionary, which is in two volumes, so that one may be carried
in each coat pocket, and be ready for use whenever a word is needed.

Mr. D. H. Sampson was found this morning at the Hotel da Europa, and my
letter from Dr. Thomas Rainey, of Rio, being presented, he expressed his
satisfaction upon making my acquaintance, and manifested a readiness to
aid me, which was quite gratifying. He suggested that it would be more
pleasant for me to move round to this hotel, as I would find more
persons here speaking the English language, and with a view to introduce
me to his friends he invited me to dine with them to-day at the Hotel da
Europa.

As my experience at the Hotel Italia was not calculated to attach me to
that establishment, I concluded to change hotels, and closed my account.

In the course of the morning I made the acquaintance of Mr. Newton
Bennaton, who is a Brazilian that spent several years at school in
Maryland, and speaks the English language as well as the Portuguese and
French. He seemed at once to take an interest in the object of my visit,
and offered to render me any assistance that lay in his power.[11]


                                           MONDAY, _September 25, 1865_.

Having deferred the presentation of my business letters, in
consideration of the Sabbath, I proceeded this morning with Mr. Bennaton
to see his Excellency Ill. Senor Vicente da Sonza Queiroz, to whom I
bore a letter from the Minister of Agriculture.

We were received with the customary courtesy, and it was soon brought to
my attention that this same gentleman owned a large and fertile tract of
land at some distance beyond Campinas, which he would either sell or
lease. If it was desirable to lease land under cultivation, he would be
willing to rent a quantity of open land at sixteen millreas ($8.00) per
acre. We had nothing favorable to expect from this source, and
accordingly thanking him for his tender of assistance, we took our leave
of this honorable gentleman.

I was next presented by Mr. Bennaton to Senor Antonio da Costa Aquiar,
who is an intelligent Brazilian that speaks the English language
fluently, and it was arranged that he would accompany me to see the
President of the province.

We accordingly proceeded to call upon his Excellency, Illm. Senor Idão
da Silva Carrão, President of São Paulo, at his palace, which by the way
was found to be rather unostentatious in its exterior, and simply neat
and plain within. My letter from the Minister of Agriculture was
delivered, and I learned that a private letter had also been received by
the President from the minister in regard to my visit. The President
indicated his disposition to give me all the requisite aid for exploring
the province of São Paulo, and the interview closed, with the
understanding that I would receive an audience next day at eleven
o’clock A. M. for the consideration of details.

My reception here partook more of a simple business character than any
previous meeting with the officials of this country, and it appeared to
be viewed by the President and by Senor Aquiar as intended solely to
accomplish an object. The attention of the President was evidently very
much occupied with business which other parties brought before him, and
several were in waiting when I was admitted.

His demeanor was respectfully courteous, and his general appearance was
intellectual and dignified, while the characteristic attitude of the man
of business was maintained throughout this rather brief interview with
me and my interpreter.

My friend, Mr. Sampson, left the city to-day for his place of business
on the railroad at Cachoeira, and placed me in charge of his room, with
the key of his trunk, and authorized me to use any thing in it that
might render me service until my baggage should arrive by the cart of
the diligence man.

Already I had accepted his offer of a shirt, and now availed myself of
another, which was needed. My baggage, however, came to hand this
evening, and there will be no further necessity to resort to my friend’s
trunk, which is well stocked with all needful articles. Upon leaving,
Mr. Sampson informed me that he would have a negro man, who spoke
Portuguese and English, in the city with a mule during the week, and
should no satisfactory arrangement be effected with the President, that
I could come up with this man to his place, where I should be equipped
for my tour.

He proposed to get some one to accompany me, as interpreter, in
communicating with the people of the country, and to provide animals for
the expedition, for all of which I feel very grateful.

But, coming here, as I do, under the authority of the Minister of
Agriculture, who represents the government of Brazil in this department,
and bringing a letter from him to the President of the province of São
Paulo, in which he is directed to provide the requisite facilities for
examining the lands of the province, I must look to him for the means of
proceeding. It is only when he may fail to do what is expected of him
that I can consistently avail myself of this or any other tender of
assistance from private individuals. My mission must have the sanction
and indorsement of this public functionary to make it what is evidently
designed by the Minister of Agriculture, a government enterprise.

Being now a boarder at the Hotel da Europa, and not a guest as
yesterday, at the table of those speaking the English language, I may
without impropriety allude to the demonstrative proceedings of the party
at breakfast and at dinner to-day.

Had I not known that this party were drawn together by kindred feelings,
as well as the same tongue, it might have been supposed that an open
rupture was imminent, in hearing their impeachment of each other, and
their apparently angry retorts upon one another.

The greatest confidence in their mutual good will constituted the key to
these quasi violent assaults based upon supposed offences; and the
actions being suited to the words, it is highly probable that those not
understanding their kindly relations might infer a state of things very
different from the reality.

In addressing the servants, who knew very little of English, the
harshest language was sometimes used; while the most threatening
attitudes and gestures were occasionally accompanied by casting a piece
of bread at the head of a negro. It seemed to afford a sort of
recreation to worry the black servants, by talking and acting in a way
that was not understood by them, and especially when their slow
movements or other shortcomings met their disapprobation. This table is
spread in a room separate from the main dining-saloon of the hotel, and
it is therefore a sort of private apartment where they are at liberty to
do as they may be disposed without any stint.

There is not so much changing of plates with this group of friends as is
customary with the Brazilians; but they indulge in all the variety of
articles and in the different kinds of drinks that the country affords,
and really live upon the fat of the land.

During the day, I was introduced to the Rev. A. L. Blackford, who is a
Presbyterian missionary from the United States to this papal dominion of
Brazil.

He manifests quite a cordial interest in my object and in my personal
welfare. This feeling was doubtless enhanced by learning that I held a
like faith with him; and he called upon me in the evening and took me to
his home, to make the acquaintance of his wife. With a full appreciation
of my reception, I felt that my lot was cast with friends, whose house
was open to me at all times.


                                          TUESDAY, _September 26, 1865_.

In a conference with Mr. Bennaton, this morning, I learned from him that
it would suit him very well to accompany me as interpreter on the
proposed tour of the country, and that he had already intimated his
readiness to go if a satisfactory compensation would be allowed by the
President.

When we started to visit the President this morning, I suggested to
Senor Antonio Augusto da Costa Aguinar, who accompanied me, the
propriety of providing for the expenses of Mr. Bennaton as interpreter,
as well as the employment of a camarada to take charge of the animals
which would be required for the voyage.

In the course of the conference with the President, the question was
propounded to me as to what compensation was expected by Mr. Bennaton;
when I replied that he had not communicated to me the terms upon which
he proposed to accompany me. The question was then asked, if I thought
he would be satisfied with three hundred millreas ($150) per month; when
I stated that it was not perhaps a matter of pecuniary consideration
with Mr. Bennaton, and that he would doubtless be disposed to accept
whatever was thought proper under the circumstances to pay him.

I was pleased to learn from Senor Aguinar at the close of the audience,
that there was a prospect of having every thing arranged for my outfit;
and after returning, I informed Mr. Bennaton of what had occurred, with
the request of Senor Aguinar that he would call at his office in regard
to the details of the arrangement.

He did not seem satisfied to undertake the trip upon the terms proposed;
and after meeting Senor Aguinar, he had an interview with Senor Dom
Bernardo Gavão, who proposed to confer with the President in reference
to the compensation of Mr. Bennaton and the other provisions for this
expedition. I can do nothing but remain quiet, and let them work out the
matter among themselves.

The Rev. A. L. Blackford came to my room this morning and invited me to
make his house my home while I remained in the city. While it was
entirely agreeable to accept his hospitality, I told him that Mr.
Sampson had kindly placed his room at my disposal, and that there were
reasons connected with my business engagements that rendered it better
to retain my present quarters. He left with the understanding that my
meals would be taken with his family, and I accordingly notified Mons.
Planet, of the Hotel da Europa, paying him five millreas ($2.50) for the
accommodation of his establishment for one night and three meals of
victuals.

Upon repairing to the residence of Mr. Blackford, at 4 o’clock P. M., I
found dinner in readiness; and the cosy quiet trio, which he, madam, and
myself made, around the circular table, was quite in contrast with the
stirring scenes around the hotel table. Of course this retired situation
suited my tastes better, and I felt really quite satisfied in my
associations with this pleasant family. Though the gentleman is from
Ohio, and the lady from Pennsylvania, there seems to be no political
prejudice against the course pursued by the South, on the part of
either; and indeed Mr. Blackford has sympathized with us in the recent
struggle to resist the incroachments upon our constitutional rights by
the Federal Government.

After dinner, we took a walk to the botanic garden, which was quite a
recreation, though there is very little evidence of that culture which
is requisite to render the place attractive. There are several pieces of
sculpture, and among them a Venus and an Adonis; but none of them
impressed me favorably as specimens of art or copies of nature.

It being Mr. Blackford’s custom to hold family worship at 8 o’clock in
the evening, I proceeded with them to the lower apartment of the house,
where the servants and some other inmates of his premises joined us in
the service. He read and sung in the Portuguese, giving me an English
and Portuguese Testament, in which I had no difficulty in following the
reading of the chapter. The principal prayer was in English, but he
closed with the Lord’s prayer in Portuguese, thus adapting the exercises
to my want of knowledge of the language of the country, and also in part
to the comprehension of the others present.


                                        WEDNESDAY, _September 27, 1865_.

Senor Dom Bernardo Gavão had a conference this morning with the
President of the province of São Paulo, and it is now understood that he
will make the arrangement with Mr. Bennaton on such terms as will be
satisfactory to him for his services as interpreter.

It was intimated to me that in the event of failure by the President to
meet the expenses of this exploration, Senor Dom Gavão would probably
advance the funds that might be required to visit an extensive landed
estate of his, which is located near the town of Araraquara and this
would traverse a large portion of the province. I feel however no
misgivings as to the course of the President in regard to this matter,
as he is well aware that there is a public sentiment in this province
which would sustain him in any encouragement given to the emigration of
our people to this region; and he has besides the authority of the
minister in appropriating from the provincial treasury whatever may be
necessary to facilitate my movements.

My observation thus far is, that the officials of Brazil are disposed to
pursue a very enlightened policy respecting the proposed emigration of
the people of the Southern States to this country, and I have far more
apprehension that we may be ultimately thwarted in our wishes by the
interests of private parties, than from any failure on the part of the
authorities of the empire, or those of the provinces, to meet our just
expectations.

I went this evening with Mr. and Mrs. Blackford to examine the public
bath-house, which has been recently fitted up in elaborate style, and is
now to be opened for gentlemen and ladies at the rate of one millreas
(fifty cents) per bath. The marble bathing-troughs and the neat
apartments, with the refreshments provided by the proprietor, will no
doubt secure a paying patronage. But the price is beyond the means of
many who would like to indulge frequently in a bath, and it is therefore
likely to be rather an aristocratic establishment. There is a
frontispiece over the entrance to the building representing a mermaid,
(half woman and half fish,) with the perfectly formed body and bust of a
naked female holding a harp in her hand and resting upon the surface of
waves that are very well delineated by the artist. This is a subject of
considerable criticism, and yet really seems a very fitting prelude to
the nudity of the bathing-room.

My position in Mr. Sampson’s room is very convenient for meeting those
who wish to see me on business or otherwise, during the day or at night;
and Mr. Preller, to whom I have a letter from Mr. Davis, spent nearly an
hour with me this evening. Upon leaving he gave me the assurance of his
readiness to serve me in any way that he could assist me.

Before leaving Mr. Blackford’s after dinner, a finely-dressed gentleman
from Rio Clara called there to see me, and to represent the attractions
of a coffee plantation which he had for sale. He expatiated in most
eloquent strains to Mr. Blackford, but his valuation was far beyond our
means.


                                         THURSDAY, _September 28, 1865_.

Having a piece of gray cloth that I had brought from home, and desired
to have made into a suit of clothes, Mr. Blackford went with me to the
tailor shop. All the trimmings will be furnished, and coat, pants, and
vest, made for fifteen millreas, ($7.50;) and they will be in readiness
upon my return from the projected trip to the interior.

We went into the large building used for the law school, and saw one of
the classes coming out of a lecture-room with the professor, who was
rather a young man, in his long robe of black silk, flowing down to his
feet. The young men appeared very genteel in their deportment and dress;
and, for the most part, had arrived at full manhood. The term of their
attendance in this course of study is five years, and if one does not
come up to the standard required in the examination, or has received a
certain number of demerit marks during the year, he is not permitted to
graduate, and has to remain another year. In some instances two extra
years have been spent, by those more fond of hunting or taking their
pleasure than of confinement to study.

I am informed that there are five hundred students of law in this
institution, and that there is another school at Bahia which has an
equal or even greater number in attendance. These are considered first
class institutions, but I have no means of knowing how they compare with
similar schools in the United States or elsewhere, and can only say that
the general standard of scholarship here is not equal to ours, though
the requirements of time are longer.

There are two monasteries in form and estate located in this city; but
there is only a single inmate as a monk in each, which serves as a
nest-egg, upon which those in charge may perhaps incubate and bring
forth some results; yet the Brazilian government has interdicted the
initiation of any other monks. The property connected with these
organizations is said to be immensely large and very valuable;
consisting of lands and negroes in different portions of the empire. But
it is supposed they will be escheated by the government, and thus these
stigmas upon the face of society will be obliterated.

There are several Catholic churches in this place, and some of them of
large proportions, but of very humble and sorry appearance compared with
the towering edifices of Rio de Janeiro. The buildings here in the
business thoroughfares are much inferior to those of Rio, yet there are
some very tasteful houses and grounds on the border of the city near the
railroad depot. The plan of the city is so very irregular as to mar its
general aspects, and but few fine equipages attract attention on the
streets. One of the greatest disadvantages of the city is the absence of
gas, and it indicates a want of enterprise or a spirit of progress which
should characterize the municipal authorities of this refined and
intelligent people. This being the capital of the province, where many
persons from abroad are assembled annually, and being regarded a good
climate and healthy locality, it behooves those in charge of her
municipal affairs to take a step forward and supply the streets with
gas, and look to the correction of some other palpable deficiencies in
the present regime.

The very agreeable announcement has been made to me by Mr. Bennaton that
all the necessary provisions for the trip to the interior had been
arranged by the President, and that he has already received seven
hundred millreas ($350) to meet expenses on the way. The animals,
however, are represented as being in wretched plight, and the camarada
has not yet been secured to take charge of them upon our journey. He
expects to take two mules of his own and his own servant, so that our
outfit will include at least six animals; two being required for
pack-mules, to carry our baggage alternately. It is his present
expectation that we will start on Saturday morning, and go up that night
to Mr. Sampson’s place at Cachoeira. But there are contingencies which
may prevent our leaving here before Monday, and it will suit me better
now to remain until then, as I do not wish to travel on Sunday when it
can be avoided.

Had I known at the outset that our preparations would have been so much
delayed, it would have suited me very well to visit some places in the
vicinity of the city, which have been reported to me as having some
interest for our objects.

One is a large landed estate belonging to the government, that is
occupied by the Baron of Itapitaninga, and yet subject to the
disposition of the authorities at any time. But I take it for granted,
there cannot be much fertility in any land convenient to the city.

There is another place consisting of nearly a square league of land,
constituting a fazenda, called Bananal, that lies some sixteen miles
from the city.

Again, a larger territory at Bragança has been recommended to me. But I
can’t see them now.


                                           FRIDAY, _September 29, 1865_.

A pair of spurs and an umbrella have been procured to-day to complete my
personal equipment for the voyage; and all is in readiness on my behalf
for departure. It is reported to me, however, that the arrangement as to
the animals and the camarada have not been consummated as yet, and that
we cannot leave to-morrow as was anticipated. In view of this, I have
intimated to Mr. Bennaton that every thing can be arranged for our
departure on Monday morning; and it is now a fixed fact that we set out
at that time to enter upon the promised tour through the territory of
this province. I have much reason for congratulation, in thinking that
the officials in Rio de Janeiro, and also at São Paulo, have done all in
their power to promote my object; and at the same time, I am gratified
with the kind spirit which has been manifested by a number of private
persons, who have expressed their readiness to serve me in any way it
might be acceptable.

In view of the liberal provision made by the President of the province
for the defraying of all expenses of travel and an interpreter, I have
determined to send him a letter of thanks, expressing my obligations for
the same. It has also appeared to me eminently proper that the public
may know that this favor is duly appreciated, and I will therefore
suggest that my communication be published in the daily papers.

With the notices in the newspapers at this place, and the letters of
introduction from various persons, with those of the Minister of
Agriculture, I hope to receive a favorable consideration from the
people.


                                         SATURDAY, _September 30, 1865_.

A ride was taken in the afternoon to the suburbs of the city in company
with Mr. Blackford. We passed the Catholic cemetery, which is enclosed
by a substantial and very high mud wall, that is whitewashed, and
presents a very neat appearance.

In looking through the bars of the massive wire gate, I observed several
elaborate and costly vaults arranged on each side of the way to the
chapel, which seems to be located near the centre of the grounds; and
the evidence of taste and attention was greater here than in most of the
structures for the living.

There is a Protestant burying-ground adjoining this cemetery, but the
rude mud wall, and the rough and uncared-for aspect within, brings home
to the passer-by that this element is weak and powerless compared with
the dominant religion of Brazil.

The small resources at the disposal of Protestants are more
appropriately applied to disseminating the truth among the people than
in adorning a place for the dead, in the proportion that the soul is of
more value than the body.

A brickyard was visited, about one mile from the city, which indicated
more mechanical adaptation of means to the end in view than is seen in
most parts of this country. A good substantial cast-iron mortar-mill,
and a well-constructed furnace for burning the brick, with an extensive
tile-covered shelter, rendered this establishment very complete. The
price of brick being here, however, forty millreas ($20) per thousand,
will soon repay the manufacturer for any extra expense in preparing to
furnish them. There are two other establishments for the making of brick
and tiles somewhat more distant from the city, and it is likely that
henceforth houses of much importance will be constructed of brick,
instead of mud walls, as heretofore; though the exorbitant price, as
yet, will prove a barrier to their extensive use, and it would pay to
make them on a larger scale, at half present price.

A little incident is worthy of record here, as illustrating a phase of
Brazilian life. Upon pronouncing my appreciation of a very fine horse,
rode by the owner of this brickyard, as “Muito bonneto,” (very pretty,)
he replied, “Está as suas ordeus,” (he is at your orders;) which was
explained by Mr. Blackford to me in English, to mean simply that he was
gratified with the remark, and did not imply any expectation that I
would avail myself of the use of the animal. This answer is very common
when any thing is complimented; and there is an anecdote told of a
distinguished gentleman travelling in foreign parts, who used a very
costly and elegant shawl. It was complimented by some one, and, in
return, tendered to the party, who accepted it as a present. Another of
equal elegance was procured by the gentleman, and was again the subject
of admiration, when it was in like manner tendered and accepted. A third
most exquisite covering was now obtained with some considerable
difficulty by our tasteful and very polite connoisseur in this
department; and, upon presenting himself in society, a friend was
enthusiastic in his laudation of its elegance and beauty. But, with the
recollection of the past, the gentleman apologized for not making a
tender of it, with the remark, that he had learned that it was the habit
of people there to accept what was offered, and having no prospect of
finding another to suit, he must be excused for retaining his shawl.

The country around the city has a dreary, barren aspect, and there is
but little evidence of cultivation, except in small patches or gardens,
where manure is used to promote vegetation, with only moderate results
compared with those of good lands.


                                                      _October 1, 1865._

Wishing to observe the Sabbath as a day of rest, and, as far as
practicable, keep it holy to the Lord, it was my wish and expectation to
take no step to-day towards my projected expedition, and supposed it was
so understood by all concerned. Yet I was informed by Mr. Bennaton this
morning that it would be necessary for the camarada to start to-day with
the pack-mules, so as to let them travel leisurely, and reach the point
in three days, to which we would ride upon our better animals in two
days. My baggage was accordingly arranged, and the voyage initiated by
sending the pack-mules off in advance to-day, though we do not leave
until to-morrow morning.

The Portuguese service, at the residence of the Rev. A. L. Blackford,
was attended to-day by about twenty-five persons, and though I could not
understand what was said, the gravity and apparent interest of the
hearers impressed me favorably. It was a mixed congregation of
Portuguese and negroes, several of whom have already made a profession
of faith in the Lord Jesus Christ as their Saviour, and become members
of the Protestant church, which is established, in an informal way,
under Presbyterian auspices, by Mr. Blackford. He holds a meeting
regularly every Sabbath morning, for preaching, and one in the
afternoon, for a practical lecture and catechism exercise. Some of the
youths seemed to answer very promptly, and their manner indicated
considerable intelligence. It was very evident that most of those in
attendance at each service were from the humbler class of society, and
there will be great difficulty in reaching the higher class of people
with Protestant doctrines.

After the second service, we took a simple repast, such as is the custom
of the house on Sunday, and though there was little cooked afresh, the
supply of articles was quite sufficient to meet all the wants of nature
for nutriment.

Mr. and Mrs. Blackford then proceeded together to visit some families
where persons were inquiring the way of salvation; and they informed me
it was their custom to spend every Sabbath evening in this kind of duty.

It is to be hoped that their efforts may be blessed to the enlightenment
of the minds of the people, and to the salvation of the souls of many
who are now in the most hopeless darkness. It really seems that this
papal dominion induces a worse state of the heart, in regard to holy
things, than the want of all religious instruction would be likely to
exhibit; and the form of religious services takes precedence to holy
living.

One of my greatest difficulties, in proposing to locate with my friends
in this country, is the conviction that we cannot so entirely set aside
the recognized religion of the government as to worship God according to
our own faith. It will, however, be an essential stipulation, that we
shall exercise entire freedom of conscience, without any interference in
our religious worship by the official authorities, while our policy will
be to detach ourselves as far as possible from all associations with the
papal element of the population.

I have brought these matters especially to the attention of the Minister
of Agriculture, and, from what I learn of his general character for
liberal views and high-toned, independent action, it is reasonable to
expect some definite and satisfactory measure will be adopted through
his influence with the government.


                                              MONDAY, _October 2, 1865_.

Getting an early breakfast at the Hotel da Europa, Mr. Bennaton and I
started on our tour at 8 o’clock this morning. I was mounted upon a gray
horse of rather unpromising appearance, that afforded quite a precarious
reliance for an extended journey through a rough country; but my friend
Sampson having returned to the city, made an arrangement by which this
animal would be replaced by a mule belonging to his partner, Mr.
Gephardt, upon our arrival at Cachoeira. He likewise placed at my
disposal a McClellan saddle for the trip, and being accustomed to use
this style of saddle, I will gladly avail myself of it.

Mr. Bennaton had two fine mules of his own, which he expected to ride
alternately; one being led by his servant who was mounted upon a horse
furnished by the President for this voyage.

We stopped at an inn styled here “hospedana,” some eighteen miles on our
way, where we got a lunch of sardines and mush made of farina, called
here “angu.” Our animals were also fed and rested for two hours, when
all being refreshed the travel was resumed. We reached Cachoeira, the
residence of Mr. Sampson, at 5 o’clock P. M., and just in time to take
dinner with the party. Mr. D. H. Sampson and Mr. Gephardt were left at
São Paulo, but a telegraphic despatch had preceded us, and we met a
hospitable welcome by Mr. S. Sampson and Mr. Dully, with Dr. Clary, who
was a guest in the house. The last-named gentleman, like myself, has
been identified with the movement of the South, and has left the country
with a view to make his future residence in Brazil.


                                             TUESDAY, _October 3, 1865_.

Early this morning I set out from the house with Mr. S. Sampson to visit
the tunnel which they are working for the extension of the railroad from
the city of São Paulo to Jundiahi. It has already been opened entirely
through, after immense labor in blasting rock throughout the whole
extent; and the work now consists in enlarging the space overhead, by
blasting the rock from the roof of the tunnel. There is a temporary
track with iron rail, and a mule-car running from the work to the
outlet, by which the loosened stone is being discharged constantly. Yet
there is a large accumulation of boulders and irregular masses of
quarried rock lying near the scene of operations. This drilling of holes
overhead requires great accuracy in the striker; for should he miss the
head of the iron drill, the force of his blow with the large
sledge-hammer would be upon the hand or wrist of the person holding the
drill.

It is said, however, that accidents are rare, and when the hammer
glances from the head of the drill the injury is not likely to be
serious. This tunnel has a shaft running up from the middle to the
surface of the ridge; and some months ago, while letting down four
negroes, the cable parted, precipitating them upon the rock beneath, by
which three were killed, and the fourth crippled for life.

In entering the tunnel the darkness made a lamplight necessary, and the
roughness of the way, with here and there puddles of water, rendered the
use of a staff essential to safe progress. It was quite cool in the
tunnel, as a current of air is circulating constantly through its entire
extent; and thus the large number of laborers employed suffer no
inconvenience. When this work is completed, all the line to Jundiahi
will be ready for laying the track with iron.

The road is already in running order from Santos to São Paulo—a distance
of forty miles—and when completed from São Paulo to Jundiahi, there will
be an addition of forty-five miles, making a continuous line of
eighty-five miles. It is projected, and surveys have already been made,
to construct a further extension of the road from Jundiahi to Campinas,
a distance of twenty-six miles.

Could I feel assured of the ultimate completion of this line of railroad
to Araraquara, it would enhance very much the interest I will take in
examining lands in that remote territory which I expect to visit.

Our route to-day lay along the line of the railroad, and I was forcibly
impressed with the appropriateness of selecting this region for a
railroad, as it is most assuredly little fitted for any thing else; and
ought to be good for this object, upon the principle of the man who
recommended his dog as a good coon-dog, because fit for nothing at which
he had ever tried him.

If this land prove good for laying a track, the owners ought to
congratulate themselves that a portion of it can be wrested from the
copina and formica, species of ants, which seem to have undisputed sway
in most parts of the territory through which we passed on our route to
Jundiahi.

Mounted upon the fine sprightly mule which was furnished me at
Cachoeira, I ascended and descended the various elevations over which
our route lay without feeling any apprehension for my safety; and moving
briskly, we reached the inn of Senor Pinto, one mile beyond Jundiahi,
before 12 o’clock M.

After getting dinner we rode back to survey the village of Jundiahi; and
found that it had one rather comely-looking church, with two others that
presented quite a dilapidated look. There was also a jail, at which a
military sentinel was on duty; and it perhaps contained some of the
patriotic recruits, who are taken in chains from this section to São
Paulo, and thence sent to Rio de Janeiro, for service in the army
against the Paraguayans. We have met on the road a number of these
fellows handcuffed, and with a chain secured around their necks, under a
mounted guard, who seemed to think that they were doing the country good
service, from the large number in charge of a few prisoners.

The architectural taste displayed in Jundiahi is not likely to become a
pattern for future builders, and therefore I need not go into any
special details; yet the fancy painting around the lower portion of the
fronts of the buildings upon the street indicated that they were making
progress in the fine arts, and that the artists had simply made a trial
of their material here, preparatory to greater attainments, when the
arrival of the steam-engine may supply them with a better model.

A few small patches of coffee tree were seen near the village which
seemed in a thriving condition, and indicated a yield far beyond what
might have been anticipated from the appearance of the soil. A change,
however, in the land, seems to commence near this place, and it assumes
here very much the aspect of red clay, but in some parts the sandy soil
predominating, and all lying very irregular, except immediately upon the
streams.

I was impressed with the adaptation of the Jundiahi river, a small
stream which runs near our inn, for the location of machinery of limited
water-power; and when the railroad reaches this place a good mill or
cotton ginning establishment would be likely to prove very advantageous
on this river. The fall is not very great, but could be arranged so as
to afford all requisite power for this or some similar purpose.

Our quarters were so infested with fleas that I found it necessary to
rise in the night and denude myself, so as to remove those that might be
in my clothing. After this I returned naked to bed, and wrapping up in
the sheet closely there was no further annoyance. This was an experiment
with me, and it succeeded so well that I commend it to others when they
may be thus unfavorably situated. The dirt floors of this house, and the
swine around the doors, presented this nuisance; while our bedding and
the outfit of the apartments were in very comfortable order, and clean.

At this point we overtook our camarada and pack-mules, which had been
sent ahead of us. Getting a change of clothing from our baggage, the
camarada was again sent in advance, so that his mules would not be
required to travel as fast as we would ride. The train now consists of
eight animals, and the mule upon which I am mounted makes nine, which is
rather more than would be desirable to move together. Our baggage
trains, consisting of four mules, two belonging to the camarada, and two
of the government stock, which are very poor and weak, requires to move
slowly, and can take more time by going forward while we stop, either
for repose, or the examination of places of interest during the
afternoon.


                                           WEDNESDAY, _October 4, 1865_.

Moving off this morning at 8 o’clock, we proceeded about fourteen miles,
and halted at the house of a German for two hours. This man had
originally come into the country as a colonist of the government, and
getting a little means had bought this place, paying fifteen hundred
($1500) dollars, for three hundred acres, with a dwelling and other
improvements. Here the soil is evidently better than that below
Jundiahi, and seems to be well adapted to the growth of corn and cotton.
I saw here a specimen of the lint of the pina tree, which is a
beautiful, silky-looking fibre, as white as cotton, and when mixed with
it makes a beautiful fabric; but it has not strength of fibre when used
alone to give proper texture to cloth. The pod is large and spherical,
growing upon a tree which is very large and tall, and though the yield
is generally abundant, the difficulty of procuring the lint is so great
that very little is gathered. Eventually the pods fall to pieces upon
the trees, and this fine silky cotton is blown broadcast through the
forests. We got at this house a very good meal, consisting of Irish
potatoes, corn bread, beans, farina, spare ribs, fried eggs, with a
dessert of honey and sweet milk. Coffee was also served after dinner, as
is the custom everywhere in the country, but I declined it, as all my
available capacity was preoccupied by other things. After leaving this
place, and proceeding towards Campinas, we began to see the successful
culture of the coffee. The extensive plantations, extending with the
greatest regularity as far as the eye could reach, presented a most
attractive feature after passing the dreary waste for two previous days.

We saw at a point within two miles of Campinas some negroes engaged in
loading a huge oxcart with the crude berries of the coffee, from an
immense pile that had been gathered from the trees growing along the
side of the road. The ground under the trees is raked clean preparatory
to stripping the berries with the hand, and an immense broad flat
receptacle made of the bamboo cane is placed under each tree, but what
fails to fall in this is easily swept up from the smooth earth into a
pile, and then taken up and put into the receptacle. These are emptied
into piles convenient to the road, from which the coffee is hauled to
the drying-yard, where it is spread out and watched carefully to guard
it against rain. When dried it is submitted to a process for taking off
the hull, and then fanned to clean it more thoroughly, or even by some
submitted to cleansing by washing.

Having turned off from the main road to Campinas, we were accommodated
with quarters at the antiquated-looking fazenda of Senor Vicente da
Sonza Queiroz, who resides in São Paulo, and gave us a letter to his
administrator at this place, with the expectation that we would stop
here a few days.

After being shown around the premises, Mr. Bennaton and I walked through
the back yard into the grove of orange trees in the garden, where we
found only bitter sweets that were not desirable to eat. When we
returned the old administrator (another word for overseer) expressed
himself as not being satisfied with our going into the back yard without
notifying him, and there being two single daughters on the premises was
doubtless the cause of his concern about our visit. All these people,
who have not been in contact with the outside world, think it a solemn
duty to keep their females in great seclusion. It may be that this old
fellow was afraid we might get a peep at the girls, while perambulating
his back yard. They have not however been seen as yet, and, unless
affording a remarkable contrast to the appearance of their father, it is
not likely they will afford much attraction to the gaze of the curious.
With every thing about the house of plain style, we are very comfortably
fixed, with a large airy room, and two sleeping-apartments.

The coffee apparatus at this place is of the oldest and most elementary
construction, and therefore it may be appropriately described in the
outset of my observation. In the first place the yard for drying is
simply a firm smooth surface of the ground, with a shelter at one side
of it, under which the coffee is carried in baskets, if there is a
prospect of rain. When this drying is completed, it is taken into a
circular box of perhaps fifteen feet diameter, and subjected to the
operation of a large wheel of wood, having a surface of twelve inches,
that rolls round in this circular box containing the grains of coffee,
and bruising or crushing off the hulls as it passes repeatedly over
them. This wheel revolves upon a sweep or beam, to which oxen are yoked
and move on the outside of the ring, while the sweep is attached to an
upright post in the centre of the ring. After this slow and bungling
procedure has done its work, the coffee is fanned or screened and
afterwards a hand sieve is employed with blowing by the laborers, to
remove the fine investments of the grain. That portion which it is
thought necessary to wash is now washed in large wooden troughs by hand,
after which another drying process completes the preparations for
market.

I saw, at this place, that remarkable phenomenon, called the Monjolo,
and really was impressed with the simplicity of this primary
exemplification of the mechanical adaptation of means to an end; but I
could not restrain laughter at the ludicrous display of see-saw motion
which was kept up every half minute. The apparatus, if it is entitled to
be dignified by that name, consists in an upright support for a beam,
which works by a sort of hinge upon its top, and having at one end a
pestle secured beneath it, that plays into a mortar, while the other end
of the beam is excavated into a trough. The water pours from a small
channel or conductor into this trough, and when filled it becomes
heavier than the other extremity. This end is thus depressed, while the
other is raised aloft; and the slanting position allowing the water to
escape, there is no longer sufficient weight to counterbalance the end
having the pestle, and consequently it descends forcibly into the
mortar; pounding, by its frequent repetition, whatever may be placed in
it. So soon as the level is again brought about, of course the water
again fills the trough, and it is again depressed and emptied, keeping
up a constant see-saw operation, day and night, unless the beam is
propped aloft, and thus its motion arrested.

The fulfilment of that ideal principle of perpetual motion is more
nearly attained in this extremely simple mechanism than by any machinery
with which science has favored the world; and though much more efficient
means have been devised, of accomplishing all that can be done by the
Monjolo, yet its ready adaptation, with a very small stream of water,
renders it useful in the hands of many, who cannot employ other
labor-saving appliances. It pounds coffee, big hominy, farina, and would
beat dough finely.


                                            THURSDAY, _October 5, 1865_.

Breakfasting at Tapera, the fazenda of Senor Queiroz, at which we were
quartered, we mounted our mules, with a servant upon another, and set
out for the fazenda of Senor Joaquim Bonifacio D’Amaral. The rest of our
train was left at Tapera until our return, and with a fine pasture and
plenty of corn, the stock ought to improve by the rest. After riding
something over four miles, with the assistance of a guide we reached the
large and really elegant establishment of the gentleman above-named.
Presenting the letter which we bore to him, he gave us a reception which
assured me we would enjoy the visit, and the result fully confirmed my
anticipations.

Although I did not speak his language, yet he seemed to communicate his
spirit through the words reported to me, and evidently thought and spoke
with much intelligence. While his bearing was dignified and refined,
there was a familiarity and simplicity in his manner that soon caused me
to feel easy in his presence.

He ordered refreshments for us, and a large waiter was brought by the
servant with coffee, ale, and brandy; but we only partook of the ale. I
had taken coffee before breakfast, and then café leite (coffee with
milk) at breakfast, and really had no mind for any further stimulant,
but courtesy demanded that something be taken.

The parlor of Senor Bonifacio is spacious and furnished very tastefully;
but the plan of the house is marred by having the small bedrooms, called
here “alcova,” without proper ventilation, and opening into the parlor.
These are also neatly furnished.

A separate apartment was assigned to each of us, and every thing
furnished that could be desired. The beds were particularly neat, the
pattern of the bedstead being that of the French style for a single
person, and yet very capacious, upon which lay spring-mattresses of the
best quality, and the whole covered with sheets and counterpanes of the
whitest hue and most tasteful pattern. The elegant earthenware jug, or
large bottle, for holding water to drink, was in a plate of the same
material upon the table, and is a very convenient article that is much
used here for keeping the water cool, and, at the same time, free from
dust that enters a pitcher. A fine china bowl and pitcher were also at
hand; and at night, a bathing-tub of metal, two feet and a half across
the mouth and eight or ten inches deep, was brought in and filled with
water, in which it was a luxury to perform ablutions. This feature of
every well-regulated Brazilian dwelling is admirably adapted to the
comfort of the inmates of a warm climate; and yet, a large proportion of
the people here use tepid or even warm water for bathing their persons
or their feet, when cold water would evidently be more pleasant and more
invigorating.

A new model of candlestick, with a glass upon it to protect the light
from the current of air in carrying it, was used for our bedrooms, and,
apart from being very appropriate, was made of silver in the most
tasteful style.

The dining-room in this establishment, as in most houses of the country,
is very large; and, although the family-table is perhaps fifteen feet
long, a table of twice that length could be accommodated in the room.
Every portion of the table-furniture was neat, and yet no special
display in the ceremonies of the table. The gentleman of the house was
seated at one end of the table, with his wife upon his left hand and
myself on his right, upon the opposite sides of the table. There was
neither ham, turkey, or fowl of any kind for dinner, which in our
country are considered essentials to a well supplied table; and yet
there was quite a sufficient variety of articles to constitute an
excellent dinner. Roast beef and beefsteak, mutton, and pork were all
served in the most approved modes, and with a good assortment of
vegetables and a delicious dessert, the dinner was relished very much.
Wines of the finest quality were upon the table, and coffee of superb
make was served after all other things were concluded. The combination
of wines and coffee seems to be an excess of stimulants in the routine
of dining in this country, and cannot be promotive of digestion; but I
relish very much the small cup of fine strong coffee, such as we had
here, and will fall into this habit of coffee after dinner without any
difficulty.

After dinner, we were furnished with horses of most excellent
saddle-qualities, and accompanied our host, Senor Bonifacio, in a ride
to his plantation. Here we saw the coffee trees in full bearing, planted
in lines and squares, so as to make the distance about nine feet between
each tree, and extending over a very large area of land. The appearance
of this field gives evidence of much careful attention, and though the
coffee trees continue to grow in the same place from fifteen to twenty
years, it is found to be important to their production that the land
should be kept in good order; and, if not cultivated in other things, it
is annually cleaned around the trees, and very often a compost, formed
by the hull of the coffee with other articles, is put upon the ground to
enrich it.

There were some young trees recently planted which had not borne any
coffee, and a crop is not expected until the fourth year after setting
out the plants, unless the plants should be over a year old, and then a
partial yield will be obtained at the end of the third year from
transplanting.

A nursery of the coffee plants was shown to us, and presented much the
appearance of a young plumb thicket, when the sprouts had reached the
height of from eighteen inches to two feet. This coffee nursery had been
planted among some advanced stalks of the mandioca, which served to
shade them when young and tender; and they had been gradually thinned
out to give the plants more air and sun as their growth advanced. There
was a large piece of ground in readiness to receive these plants so soon
as there might be sufficient rain to transplant them.

This land had the timber felled and dried, when fire was applied and
burnt over the whole, destroying all the leaves and small limbs, and yet
leaving the larger limbs and trunks upon the ground. In the midst of
this network, it was expected to set out the coffee trees, and between
them to plant corn and beans, with the expectation of getting a full
crop of the latter articles. Of course no ploughing is practicable, and
all the work is done with the hoe, as is the case with nearly all the
culture of this country.

The corn which had been planted here had usually five or six stalks in
the hill, and I observed from the number of old stalks from last year,
standing in some places together, that it is the custom to let this
number remain in one place. Although the yield is reported to be good
with this mode of culture, it is very evident that fewer grains in a
hill and the use of the plough would enhance the result.

Senor Bonifacio showed me a specimen of a large many-toothed plough,
which was of French manufacture, and fitted alone for ground that was
smooth and without roots. He has also a specimen of the large American
plough, which is better adapted to ordinary use. But he has done little
more than experiment with these implements, and the difficulties
attending the use of the complicated French ploughing machine will be a
barrier to its successful employment; while the want of knowledge and of
training on the part of negroes and animals will doubtless prevent him
from turning the other to practical account. The farmer of the United
States is needed here to learn the fazendeiros of Brazil the proper use
of the plough, and should any considerable number remove to this
country, they will effect quite a revolution in agriculture in a few
years.

The trunks of many of the immense trees which had constituted the
original forest were lying upon a piece of fresh land, and the Pon
D’Alho and Figare Branco were pointed out to me as the indications of
good soil, when found thus in close proximity. The former has the smell
of garlic, even in the dry state, and when burned, it yields a large
proportion of potash from the ashes. It is said likewise to have the
property of attracting the magnetic needle to such an extent as to
interfere with the accuracy of the compass in surveying lands where it
is to be encountered.

The Jangada is a small tree which springs up on land of good quality
which has been under cultivation, but is thrown out to rest and
recuperate. The second forest growth upon this kind of soil is called in
the Portuguese language “Capoera;” and the land varies in quality, as it
has been more or less exhausted by the first cultivation. Hence the
importance of noting those growths upon it, which indicate that it
continues to be productive.

My object in examining these improved plantations in the outset is to
get information as to the different qualities of soil and their
productions; and at the same time to get the views and the experience of
disinterested parties, as to all matters that may assist me in making a
judicious selection of territory for my friends.

At the saw-mill of Senor Bonifacio, near his residence, was seen the
wood of the Cabriuve, which is a very hard, brown material, used in
constructing machinery, or for building purposes. The Tariba is a yellow
and very durable substance, used for posts, which are set in the earth.
The Sucupina is very bitter to the taste, and is also of a yellow hue.
It is likewise very durable when partially embedded in the ground. The
Goncalo Aldes is of a most beautifully-variegated, dark brown and yellow
color. It is very hard and finely grained, so as to admit of the highest
polish; and is employed for the frames of pictures or other decorative
work by cabinet makers.

The different qualities of wood enumerated in the last paragraph have
been used in connection with the magnificent dwelling of our host, which
has just been completed in the most elaborate style.

A team of fourteen oxen was seen here, attached to a strong high-wheeled
cart, beneath which a huge log was suspended at one end and dragged upon
the other end in the manner adopted in the States. These carts have the
wheels fixed firmly upon the ends of the axles, so that all revolve
together, and this plan is generally observed in all the vehicles for
the use of oxen even when there are four wheels. The junction of the
axle with the other portions of the wagon or cart is not usually
lubricated so as to prevent the creaking noise from friction in the
revolution of the wheels, and consequently progressing is attended with
a sound that may be heard at the distance usually of half a mile, or
even farther, in some instances. This harsh and shrill sound is thought
to have a very important effect upon the performance of the oxen that
have become accustomed to it, and unless it is heard they manifest an
unwillingness to go forward with the load. Hence it is that these carts
are rarely greased, and the drivers consider the music as a necessary
accompaniment to their carts.

At one time the municipal authorities of the city of São Paulo decreed
that those carts which entered the capital should be so lubricated as to
obviate this noise, declaring that it was a nuisance to the city. But
the consequence was that the carts did not come in to bring the wood for
fuel or to perform any other service, the owners insisting that the oxen
would not work without this old familiar sound, and the edict was
repealed.

Immediately in front of the residence, and not more than one hundred
yards distant, is the machinery of the saw-mill, grist-mill, and
coffee-mill, all moved by water-power, brought by a race from a dam some
four or five hundred yards off.

Upon this stream there are seven distinct falls, and this has fixed the
name of the place, and of its proprietor, as “Settequéda,” the
Portuguese word for seven falls. This gentleman is known far and near by
this name, and it is the ordinary title given him by his friends in
social intercourse.

As the apparatus here embodies all the most recent improvements for
treating the coffee, it will be described with some minuteness. It is
what is styled a “despolpidor,” and receives the coffee directly from
the tree, without any preliminary process of drying, and even while the
berries are yet red, previous to their becoming black. This saves much
trouble which attends other processes, and enables the coffee-grower to
gather his crops earlier than when it is required to dry upon the tree,
or to be dried after gathering, prior to cleaning.

The coffee brought directly from the trees is placed first in a
receptacle built with brick and cement, containing water; which not only
washes the berries, but floats them forward with a current that runs
from this tank by a small trough to another receiver, which constitutes
the despolpidor.

In this there is a revolving cylinder of brass or copper, which has the
surface roughened like a blacksmith’s rasp; and as the coffee passes
into the cavity where this revolves, it comes in contact with this rough
exterior surface, and the outside hull of the berry is detached, and the
investing membrane of each separate grain is more or less torn, but not
entirely separated. This being accomplished, the hulls drop out at a
waste-way, and the grains are carried below with the water into a large
reservoir. Here there are arms or sweeps of wood revolving upon a
central shaft, and constantly stirring and agitating the coffee in the
water, as it passes with the current to the most dependent portion.
There it is subjected to a percolating process of washing by the passage
of the water through it, and out below through a perforated plate. From
this it is dipped up by a system of cups or buckets, such as is used for
elevating flour in our bolting apparatus, and is deposited in a large
cemented reservoir, from which any remaining water is drained off
through perforations in the bottom. The coffee is now taken out to be
subjected to the drying process for the first and only time.

The yard for drying the coffee, called “tereiro,” is a neatly paved,
level space, with a number of divisions for receiving the coffee in the
different stages of drying. This being laid with glazed tile, and
entirely free from dust or other impurity, that can affect the clean
grains of coffee, the drying is accomplished in the most satisfactory
manner.

As a portion of the investment of each grain remains attached to it
after it is completely dry, the process of fanning has still to be
resorted to; and in this unique establishment two fans are connected, so
as to receive the coffee one from the other; and the last so arranged
with a sieve of graduated openings, that the large, fine grains of
coffee are separated from the smaller and imperfect grains. All being
now entirely clean and assorted, it is ready for sacking.

The house in which this entire machinery is arranged is not exceeding
twenty-five feet square; and though there are three different
elevations, in which different stages of the work are conducted, yet but
one floor is required in the building. This compact and nicely-adjusted
apparatus does great credit to the energy and enterprise of the
proprietor; and though he has received many suggestions from other
establishments, there is, perhaps, no single coffee-mill in Brazil that
combines so much efficiency and economy of labor in treating this great
staple. I would therefore urge those who may be entering upon this
business to make a visit to Settequéda, even should it be two hundred
miles distant, so as to get the details of this establishment.

The coffee treated in this way has a value in the market of from five to
ten per cent. above that cleaned by the ordinary process; and when a
fine article is desired for family use, it will command in Brazil a
higher price than any of the coffee shipped to the United States ever
brings in that market. I am informed here, that none of the finest
specimens of coffee are shipped from Brazil to the United States, as the
merchants will not pay the prices at which they sell in Rio de Janeiro.
But these fine lots of coffee find a market in England, and consequently
all the best coffee takes that channel of trade. We are accustomed, in
the United States, to think that it is mere talk as to the superiority
of the living in England; yet, undoubtedly, their progress in
manufactures and arts is not without a proportionate advancement in what
pertains to comfort in their households, and to gratification of taste
at their tables.


                                              FRIDAY, _October 6, 1865_.

We took our leave of Settequéda this morning, and the gentlemanly
proprietor rode with us to an adjoining fazenda belonging to his sister.

Here we had an exemplification of another process for hulling the
coffee, and next in importance to that we have described as being
effected by the despolpidor. It consists in the use of the mortar and
pestle, after the manner adopted in the rice mills of South Carolina.

A number of mortars being excavated from a solid trunk of wood, and thus
placed side by side in a row, constitutes the first element. Next,
pestles for each mortar are arranged, with upright pieces of timber,
having an aperture of about two and a half feet long, and two inches in
width; and these are set in a frame so as to preserve a perpendicular
position. The final appliance is a shaft, with arms extending so as to
catch in these apertures at each revolution, and raising the pestle a
certain distance, the arm slips again from the aperture, and the pestle
falls into the mortar, thus by its weight pounding the coffee. These
arms are so arranged that a portion of the pestles are elevated at each
arc of the circle of revolution; so the work is continuous, under the
operation of the water-power by which the machinery is put in motion. By
this process the hull is very effectually broken and detached from the
grain, but then the use of a ventilator is requisite to separate the
grains and larger portions of the hull, and the sieve is required with
the blowing of the operation, while the coffee is thrown up in the air
time after time, to clean out all foreign matter.

In coming out from the examination of the working of the coffee we were
regaled with some very fine oranges, which were the more prized because
almost out of season in this region. There were also some fine specimens
of the Mamão, a fruit which has its name from the supposed resemblance
to the female breast. It grows upon the tree in clusters near the trunk,
or, in a different species, upon long pendulous branches extending out
some distance from the body of the tree. It is nearly as large as a
small cantelope, and resembles in color and taste the mushmelon.

As we were leaving this place Dom Vaz, of Campinas, was met at the gate,
and introduced to us by Senor Bonifacio. He was coming, as we supposed,
upon a professional visit, and was mounted upon a very fine mule, which
is the most usual and most efficient means of transportation in this
country. I was impressed with his intelligent and sprightly appearance,
with a characteristic energy and activity in his manner, though perhaps
fifty years of age. I learned he formerly resided in Rio de Janeiro, but
not having good health there he removed to the city of Campinas, and
has, in a few years, secured a large and profitable business in his
profession as a physician.

On our way back to our quarters we overtook Senor Joaquim Egydio de
Sonsa Aranha, to whom a letter was delivered from Senor Dom Bernardo
Gaveão. It was read, and then he extended his hand, expressing his
satisfaction at making my acquaintance. His physiognomy is the most
demure, and his manner the least demonstrative, of any gentleman that I
have yet seen.

He was the last President of the House of Deputies of the Provincial
Assembly, and there may be a great deal in this grave exterior, proving
that deep water runs smooth. Upon reaching his house, he offered us
whatever we might choose from his enumerated assortment of drinks. Mr.
Bennaton indicated ale, and this, with porter, was produced upon a
waiter by a negro. I was now particularly struck with an illustration of
the sentiment, that “Actions speak louder than words,” on the part of
our host; who, instead of ordering a cork-screw, made a twisting motion
of the hand, and a look in the direction from which he expected it to be
brought. This was understood, and the article brought accordingly to
open the bottles.

Some other gentlemen of a more lively cast rode up soon after our
arrival, and, dismounting, left their mules, with the bridles thrown
down upon the ground. This seems to be a signal for the animal to stand
until some one comes to take charge of it, and all well-trained mules
seem to understand this; but occasionally, as in this party, one walks
off to look after what he may be able to gather from the yard or the
crib.

Upon the entrance of this party there was no formal introduction to us,
and yet bows were exchanged, and one of them approached and shook hands
with me. I should have construed the previous demeanor of Senor Egydio,
in connection with his failure to present me to his friends, as
indicative of a want of proper respect; but his manner with them was
much the same as previously, and I am informed by Mr. Bennaton that
introductions under such circumstances are not customary in this
country. The persons meeting in this way are expected to find out each
other as best they may; and, with this view, it is usual to set about a
system of interrogation as to the name, business, distinction, &c., of
one another. I am not favorably impressed with this style of doing
business, and must think that a due regard for the courtesies of life
require that introductions should be given when strangers meet in this
way.

We made but a brief visit, and left without any special demonstration of
interest in our movements by this demure provincial deputy. That he
intended to be polite, I have no reason to doubt; but if I had to
encounter such a demeanor from all persons to whom letters are borne,
the most natural inference would be, that my mission was not entirely
acceptable.

After returning to Tapera, where our baggage had been left, we proceeded
to pack up our trunks, so as to let the camarada start this afternoon
with the pack-mules, and thus keep in advance of us.

In looking around the yard here, I observed a large number of hogs, and,
for the most part, in good order, but most of them being molested with
the small bicho that penetrates the skin wherever there is least hair.
This little insect is black, like a flea, but enters the skin like a
chigre, and is very prone to get into the feet of persons who are even
for a few minutes without shoes, and make a sore place if not extracted.

In the afternoon, we took a walk into the coffee field, and though the
most of the crop had been gathered, there were a number of trees having
their full supply of berries. Upon counting some of the best-filled
limbs, I found a single straight twig to contain about seventy-five
berries or one hundred and fifty grains, and three pounds to the tree is
an average yield.


                                            SATURDAY, _October 7, 1865_.

Our pack-mules having gone on yesterday afternoon, we rode out this
morning from the fazenda of Senor Queiroz, known as Tapera, and
proceeded to Campinas, where we expected to call upon Dr. Reinhardt; but
he was absent on a visit to Sorocaba. This gentleman came originally
from the United States, with others, under a commission to make a
botanical exploration of the country, and, after closing his engagement
with the government, he concluded to remain in the country, and is very
much esteemed by all who know him.

This city, like other interior towns, has but little to attract the
favorable notice of one who has been accustomed to the display of
architectural taste in the cities of the United States. Yet there are a
number of neatly-constructed houses, and those more recently built
manifest an improvement in style which seems to augur better for the
future.

The elaborate work of carving which has been executed in the recently
erected Catholic church exceeds any specimen of native art which has
been seen in Brazil. The most extensive decorations of the interior of
the building, and the most artistic figures upon eight different altars
on either side of the long and lofty hall, prepare us for the grand and
rich ornaments which encircle the great altar at the end of the church.
The great length of the building, and the lofty elevation of the
unsupported arch overhead, are, of themselves, remarkable features of
this region, and would commend this structure to our attention, if there
was nothing to attract within.

But the specimens of exquisite carving in native wood of the country
present the most elegant and delicate workmanship that the world can
produce. It seems as if the genius of some other land had been
transformed to this city to give a fancy sketch which might seem to
elevate the taste of the people. All the work is not yet completed, and
there were several artisans engaged in carving out figures from the
rough pieces of wood. But there seems to be no general movement towards
finishing the work, and the general aspect of the exterior of the
building is that of a ruin, rather than the progressive improvement of a
growing structure.[12]

The common people in all these interior towns look as if they had little
to do, and less to think about, and it evidently afforded considerable
curiosity to men and women as we passed through the city.

Most of the better class of women confine themselves closely to their
houses, or, if seen upon the street, have their heads covered with the
hood of a cloak which envelops their persons. But a more numerous class
of females err on the other extreme; and with bare heads and bare arms,
their natural developments are open to all observers. There is a style
adopted very generally by this class, of having only the chemise on the
body, and a skirt about the waist, thus bringing parts into view which
modesty prompts most females to conceal with great care.

This free and easy apparel is also adopted by the female servants that
are seen about the inns or hospedarias for the accommodation of
travellers; and while it may do for a negro woman employed at washing or
other duties, I am surprised that the white women, who have any
self-respect, should appear in public, thus loosely attired about their
breasts.

It is not uncommon on the route we came through the country, to see the
Portuguese and negroes accompanying the troops of pack-mules without a
shirt. Though they are provided with this garment, it is thrown across
the mule upon which the man is mounted, or tied around his waist, and
thus the sun comes in direct contact with the skin. This kind of
exposure cannot be comfortable, and it cannot be necessary for the free
use of the arms when no labor is performed, yet they seem to have a
partiality for stripping to the buff in this way. Common decency in the
United States would forbid this sort of public denuding of the person,
but here it is a part of the programme of this kind of life, and is not
noticed by those accustomed to the habits of the country, so far as
respects this class of people.

On the contrary of the view here given, it will be found that the
Brazilian gentleman is quite as circumspect in regard to his person as
respects exposure and cleanliness as the most fastidious taste would
exact.

The lands lying along the road after leaving the immediate vicinity of
Campinas were not found under such fine cultivation, and we saw again
signs of the copina, which throws up its mounds of earth in almost every
abandoned field of this country.

We stopped about noon at one of the roadside inns and got our horses
fed, while we waited leisurely for dinner to be prepared for us. Resting
until 4 o’clock P. M., the voyage was resumed, and riding twelve miles,
we stopped for the night at the hospedaria of Ponte Atibaia. Here we had
condiments with our supper and fared well in all respects.[13]


                                              SUNDAY, _October 8, 1865_.

All hands were around this morning at half-past four o’clock, to prepare
for the road, and coffee was ordered while we dressed. Each of the party
seemed to have put on his best outfit in view of the day, and the fact
that Ybicaba was our destination. Even our camarada had put on a neat
white shirt and boots, whereas he had heretofore been barefooted, as is
the custom with this class of men on most occasions.

It presents quite an odd spectacle to see one of these fellows mounted
upon a mule with bare feet, and a huge pair of spurs strapped about his
ankles. His stirrups are purposely small, so as to receive but two or
three toes, and when they have rode a great deal, quite a space is
formed between the toes, by the constant pressure of the stirrup. My
inference in regard to thus having the stirrups so small is, to prevent
the possibility of the entire foot being caught in the stirrups in case
a man is thrown from his mule, as it certainly cannot be for comfort or
convenience, either in mounting or riding with the bare feet.

The negro servants here much more frequently wear shoes than the
Portuguese camaradas or troupeiros, and the boy Joaquim who accompanies
Mr. Bennaton is well-dressed, and keeps himself neat and clean at all
times. He is out this morning with white pants and his hair combed and
braided in the most approved darkey style. He is beginning to understand
my little phrases of the Portuguese language, and seems disposed to
render me any assistance or service required.

When we set out this morning, shortly after five o’clock, it was not yet
clear daylight, and the atmosphere was quite cool, rendering our
overcoats indispensable for comfort. Indeed they have been used every
morning until 9 o’clock, but after that hour it becomes warm, and from
12 o’clock until 3 o’clock in the afternoon the sun is oppressively hot.
The heat here, however, is not greater than is experienced in the United
States during the summer months, and the temperature of this climate at
night is invariably more pleasant than in the Southern States.

All well know that the winter in the United States is during those
months which constitute the summer of Brazil; and vice versa, so that,
now, while it is becoming colder north of the equator, the heat is
increasing in this southern latitude.

Thus far, less inconvenience has been experienced from the heat than was
anticipated, and but for the protracted drought, which has parched the
earth, and retarded vegetation of every kind in this section, the
atmosphere would now be more agreeable during the middle of the day.

It is no part of my plan to eulogize the climate, or any other feature
of this country, except as the facts may warrant a favorable estimate.
Having an opportunity to judge of the nature of the climate in the
latter part of winter and spring, with the forthcoming summer, I may
determine with some certainty what will be its effects upon people from
our latitude, by my personal experience.

The range of the thermometer as yet has not exceeded 85° Fahrenheit; and
the sensible influence of the sun is not greater than I have experienced
at a corresponding season in South Carolina and Georgia.

Most of the region of country through which we passed to-day consisted
of plateau land rather sparsely timbered with large trees, and some of
it resembled the low lands a short distance from the banks of our
rivers. This was overgrown with shrubbery and bamboo cane, and having a
growth of small trees interspersed with large timber. The general aspect
of the surface was that of an undulating plain, but occasionally we
encountered a ravine of considerable depth, making the descent and
ascent rather difficult for our animals, and almost impracticable for
carts or wagons.

The supply of water was more deficient upon our route to-day than upon
any part of the road travelled heretofore; and however desirable land
might be here, the difficulty of procuring an adequate supply of water,
either for drinking or for machinery, would be a serious objection.

Twelve miles from our starting point we entered the town of Lemeire,
which has sprung up within a few years to a respectable size. Some of
the houses presented a very good appearance, but the usually dull aspect
of these mud-built houses gives a monotony to all these interior towns
which may excuse any detailed notice.

Since leaving the mountain range, this side of Jundiahi, the nature of
the soil and the general configuration of the surface has undergone a
gradual change, with a better adaptation to agricultural purposes. The
dark reddish or brown color of the earth, which predominates in this
region, is considered to be of volcanic origin in some former period of
the world, and called “terra rocha.” It is found to be especially well
adapted to the culture of coffee, and likewise well adapted to the
growth of corn and beans, while the experiment made thus far with the
cotton plant promises also an abundant yield. There is, however, a
somewhat sandy level soil in parts, interspersed with these dark red
lands, which present to my view very favorable indications for the
culture of cotton, and the experience of planters will soon develop
whether the former or the latter can be cultivated to best advantage in
this crop.

At 9 o’clock A. M. we arrived at the magnificent fazenda of Commendador
José Vergueiro, known as Ybicaba. He gave me a hearty welcome in the
English language, and told me any thing and every thing in his house was
to be used as my own while it might suit me to remain with him. In
extenuation of his imperfect use of the English tongue, he said that he
had told Mr. Bennaton in Portuguese, of his desire to accommodate me,
and he wished me to make known through him any thing I might want.

I was very much pleased to find here, also, Senor Henry Whitaker, who
speaks English well, and my sojourn here is likely to be relieved of
much of the embarrassment of intercourse with others. The lady of
Commendador Vergueiro does not speak English, but seems very kindly
disposed, and very dignified in her manner.

We reached here just in time to join the family at breakfast, and after
a ride of eighteen miles I enjoyed the tender and fat beefsteak, with
nice wheat bread and coffee, in connection with the other supplies of
the table. There was such a variety of articles for breakfast, and every
thing in such excellent order, that it could not have been much improved
by notice of our coming. After concluding breakfast, Mr. Whitaker, Mr.
Bennaton and myself, indulged a walk round the garden, where quite a
variety of fruit trees were seen growing in the greatest perfection. The
orange, the pine apple, and also the peach, were among the number. A
specimen of the genuine tea-plant was also seen here, but there was only
a few plants, and no attempt to cultivate it for use of the family or
for market.

Between 3 and 4 o’clock P. M. dinner was announced, and we had a most
sumptuous feast of good things. The absence of fowl of any kind was
again noticed, and turkeys, ducks and chickens are evidently not so much
prized here as with us. Big hominy, of the whitest and nicest form, is
used here with boiled milk as a dessert; and though very different from
our mode of using the article, it is very good in this way. I told Mr.
Bennaton that it would be more relished if fried, or eaten with gravy,
as a part of the substantials of the meal. But he said it would surprise
the people in this country very much to see the canjeen, as it is here
called, eaten in that mode; and I therefore conform to the custom of the
land, and take it as dessert with milk or syrup.

In the afternoon we walked out to the colony of Germans, French and
Portuguese, located upon this place. I counted one hundred and
sixty-four tenements for families, and learned that there were
thirty-six others occupied, making two hundred families. They are here
engaged to gather the coffee from the fields, at fixed rates for each
bushel, and have a house with a small parcel of land, upon which to grow
a little corn or other articles for themselves. They live in the most
saving manner, with a view to accumulate enough to buy a place and live
upon it, and the interior of their houses seemed to have a scanty
outfit.


                                              MONDAY, _October 9, 1865_.

Before leaving my room this morning I asked the servant for water to
take a general bath, saying, “Fraga me agua, para lavor,” to which his
reply was an interrogation, “Quente ou frio?” (warm or cold,) and I
said, “Quero frio,” (I wish cold.)

Thus my acquisitions in the language are beginning to avail me, and I
trust in a short time to be able to make known all my ordinary wants.

We set out before breakfast to make a survey of the extensive
establishment for treating the coffee, which is run by steam-power.

The first step is to remove the outer hull of the berries, and for this
purpose he employs four dispolpadores, such as described at Settequéda,
each being capable of hulling five hundred bushels of the crude berries
in a day, making two thousand in a day when all are fully employed. Not
having a supply of water sufficient to move the machinery, or to float
the coffee into the apparatus, it has to be washed before going into the
dispolpadores if it should be dirty, and it may then be put in while
wet. After the hull is removed, the coffee grains having still their
separate investment, are dried in the ample tile-covered yard that is
adjoining the building. The cleaning process is conducted by two large
fans, and if any of the smaller grains slip through the sieve of the fan
without being entirely cleaned, they are submitted to hand sieves. Thus,
all the coffee is prepared for sacking. The specimens seen in the
building were entirely free from dust or any foreign matter, and the
proprietor states will command from two to five cents per pound more
than the rolled or pounded coffee.

The store-room contains an immense amount of uncleaned coffee, and the
crop made on this place this year is reckoned at fifty thousand arrobas,
or sixteen hundred thousand pounds of clean coffee. This is below the
annual average crop, and Senor Vergueiro thinks the blooming trees
indicate a larger yield for the next crop.

This coffee milling establishment is upon a much larger scale than that
of Settequéda, but there are a number of conveniences and improvements
in the latter, which the want of water does not admit here.

There is a saw-mill adjoining the coffee-mill, which is run by a
separate engine of four horse-power, and performs very satisfactorily
with a perpendicular saw.

In addition to these there is a cotton-gin, and packing apparatus under
the same roof.

An American cotton-gin of seventy saws is run by the same engine, of
eight horse-power, which works the coffee machinery. The compress or
packing apparatus is a pattern which has been in use for some years in
the United States, but is made upon a small scale to pack bales of
ninety-six pounds for transportation upon pack-mules.

The gin and compress were brought from Santos upon wagons drawn by oxen.

The ordinary hemp bagging is used here for covering the cotton, and the
sepo vine, which grows in this country abundantly, makes an admirable
substitute for roping. It is very unyielding, and being smooth, with a
facility for knotting, it fulfils all the indications completely and
economically.

The hull of the coffee, and the cotton seed, with the refuse from the
saw-mill, have constituted the fuel for the steam-engine, thus wasting
the cotton seed that might be made very profitable, either by converting
them into oil, or for manure. Upon bringing these matters to the
attention of Senor Vergueiro, he expressed his intention to cease this
destructive policy; and until he may be able to procure an apparatus for
the manufacture of the cotton seed oil, he proposes to accumulate his
seed, when it will be convenient to pour water upon them, if it should
not rain sufficient to wet them, and thus rot them for manure.

A blacksmith shop and a woodshop are in very successful operation,
making his own wagons, and machinery for all the purposes of his
extensive establishment; and all of good quality.

A large and well-arranged brickyard is brought into requisition for the
manufacture of brick, tiles, and earthen pipes, that are demanded about
the place; and his fazenda being within itself a village, the
consumption of these articles is very considerable throughout the year.

The negro quarters are adjoining the residence of the family, and
enclose a large court, in the centre of which is a belfry, and a lock-up
for such as become unruly. There is a hospital department, with an
office, where medicine is dispensed by the physician when his visits are
required.

The stables are large and well-arranged for feeding, and the stalls are
substantially floored with sawed plank, while there is an upper story
for hay.

A spacious and neat fowl-house has recently been constructed, connected
with an open grass lot, having a supply of water for the poultry.

The old coffee-mill and saw-mill, moved by water-power, are still
preserved in good running order on the place.

After dinner to-day we were supplied with fine saddle horses, and
accompanied Senor Vergueiro over his wide domain of a million coffee
trees and fine cotton lands. We rode rapidly over miles of winding roads
through the fields of coffee, stopping here and there to examine some
feature of special interest, either in the mode of management or the
development of the trees. Some had been growing there for twenty-six
years that still presented a vigorous appearance and afforded a good
yield of coffee this season. Others that were thirty-four years old have
been cut off eighteen inches above the ground, two years since, and have
again put forth branches, which present all the aspects of thriving
trees. They have borne a crop of coffee this season, and the blooms
afford a fine prospect for another year. This is a very interesting
feature in the management of the old trunks of the coffee, as the
advantages of a new growth are secured in one-half the time it could be
attained from a new plant. Even should the root require to be dug around
and manured, it would be far preferable to the uncertainty connected
with the growth of a new plant; and in lands of good quality it
certainly presents great advantages.

The stumps of the cotton stalk were also seen during our ride, which had
recently been cut off for the purpose of securing the growth of another
crop. There is a perennial growth of the cotton plant in this latitude,
from the absence of frost; and by simply cutting away the limbs in the
early spring another development ensues, which produces a larger yield
than the first crop; and it is supposed that it may be cut off again at
the end of the second year, and produce for the third time a full crop
of cotton.

Thus the risks attending the sprouting and the early growth of the plant
are avoided here; and as the evidence is conclusive that the yield of
the second year is superior to that of the first, the advantages for the
culture of cotton in this country gives it a preference to the southern
part of the United States. The additional element of slave labor here is
likely to afford results that cannot be secured by hired labor in the
Southern States; and so soon as the negroes have become acquainted with
the proper mode of working the cotton, we may anticipate yields of this
staple exceeding any that have ever been realized in the United States.

The production of cotton here already is stated to reach two thousand
pounds of seed cotton to the acre; and if this is a uniform yield of
good land with good culture it is a decided success. There is not so
much labor bestowed upon the plant here as in the Southern States, and
the hoe is the only implement employed in the culture of this, or any
thing else. It will appear marvellous to our heroic cotton planters that
no preparatory ploughing is done, and that not even a hoe is used in
planting the seed. The process, as I observed it here, consists in a
negro scratching a place in the ground with his hand, and making three
or four holes with the end of a stick, into which seeds of cotton are
dropped and covered with the hand. This is done at distances of two and
a half feet, and sticks of wood or pieces of cane are stuck into the
ground to mark the place, and by this means to preserve right lines for
the rows. Note this, ye planters of cotton in the Southern States, and
think how painstaking you are to develop the growth of cotton in its
several stages; yet here, in Brazil, it grows and matures well without
culture of any kind. If cotton can be relied upon here to yield an
average crop without labor, what may be expected from proper preparation
of the soil for receiving the seed, and thorough working of the ground
during the early growth of the plant.

Finding that the root of the cotton remained in the ground during the
winter without injury, Senor Vergueiro supposed an advantage might be
gained by planting the cotton seed during the winter, so that it might
sprout up and commence growing in the earliest portion of the spring. He
planted accordingly a considerable piece of ground in the month of May,
which is in this latitude very nearly as November in the State of
Louisiana. The prospect is quite unfavorable from present appearance of
the plants, and he expects to replant the land, with the exception of a
small space, to test fully the experiment. Had he known how much depends
upon the disappearance of all frost, and the warming of the earth under
the genial suns of the spring, as a preliminary to cotton planting, in
the land where experience is the guide to success, this experiment would
not have been necessary to convince him that nothing could be gained by
the planting of the seed in the cold season, though there might be no
frost to kill the plant.

Senor Vergueiro deserves great credit, however, for the boldness and
energy with which he has urged forward his improvements, and others are
now profiting by his enterprise in the domain of agriculture and the
arts.

He produces all the corn requisite to raise hogs for his consumption,
and also for a large number of horses and mules, keeping a pack of the
latter to assist in transporting his coffee to market. He cures a
considerable amount of hay for the use of his animals in winter, when
the grass does not grow so abundantly; and I have heard of no other
person in the country who gives any attention to haymaking.

Thus we find this fazendeiro combines all the various interests that
conduce to the comfort of his family and the welfare of the large number
of colonists and slaves who are dependent upon him for supplies. His
extensive fazenda is emphatically a self-sustaining establishment, and
he lives within himself to a very large extent. He grows his own beef
and mutton, as well as his hogs, and his table is always supplied with
the best that is found anywhere in the country.

Of course, there are many things which must come from other parts, and
he avails himself of all the importations that may render a household
comfortable, or a table desirable. Though hams are not cured here, the
finest was found upon his table; and though flour comes from abroad, the
choice varieties of flour bread, as well as other kinds, showed the
domestic management of the estimable senhora most satisfactorily.


                                            TUESDAY, _October 10, 1865_.

We took our leave this morning of our kind friends at Ybicaba, and with
a guide furnished by Senor José Vergueiro, we set out for the fazenda of
Senor Rafael Paes de Barros, son of the Baron of Rerecicoba.

Our route lay through a region having a very large growth of timber, and
we saw trees of eight feet in diameter, which gives twenty-four feet
around the base of the trunk. The soil in this vicinity is of a dark red
or purple color, and of a loose loamy consistence. It is the richest
land of this country, and produces to great advantage all the crops
usually planted here; yet some planters think this rich purple soil,
that is known here as “terra rocha,” is not so well adapted to the
culture of cotton as the land which has an admixture of sand.

We reached São Antonio, the residence of Senor Barros, about 12 o’clock,
and he met us in the front yard with an open expression of hospitality,
which made me feel that his words of welcome were not a mere empty
sound.

After showing us his cotton house, where he had a large quantity of
cotton in the seed, he took us to his recently-constructed gin-house,
where the machinery is moved by water-power. He has a thirty-saw gin of
American manufacture, and a small screw of his own make, which will meet
his present wants; but so soon as his large force is employed in growing
cotton, the appliances for preparing it for market must be greatly
increased.

His experiment in the culture of cotton has been entirely satisfactory,
and he considers the crop of great importance with the present high
price in Rio.

The article grown here is of better quality than most of the cotton
grown in the Southern States, and the fibre is not only longer and
finer, but it is evidently stronger than our cotton. Some small
specimens of the sea island cotton have been seen, which grew in this
region of country, and they presented a beautiful silky-looking fibre;
yet the size of the bolls, and the general yield of the stalks, does not
afford encouragement to grow it rather than the other qualities of
cotton.

Upon this fazenda there are four hundred thousand coffee trees, of which
two hundred and eighty thousand are bearing fruit, and the others are
young trees recently planted out.

Being invited to remain for dinner, we enjoyed a most abundant supply of
the substantials, as well as the delicacies of the table.

Senhora manifested her respect by meeting us with a bow before going to
her seat at the table, and though she made but few remarks during the
dinner, this was simply in accordance with the recognized rôle of
females in society here. A lady in Brazil is kept secluded to a great
extent, and is rarely seen in a parlor with gentlemen, except they may
be intimate friends of the family. When seen at the table, she is
usually seated by her husband, or if he is at the end of the table her
position is adjacent to the corner upon his right or left hand, and
guests are seated on the opposite side.

In the case of young ladies the restrictions are still greater, and with
the existing regime, I don’t understand how gentlemen become
sufficiently intimate with young ladies to form a basis of marriage. Yet
matrimonial alliances are here formed very early, and perhaps in part
influenced by the desire of the parent to transfer the guardianship of
his daughter to other hands, so that he may be relieved of the sense of
responsibility. I am told that it is not uncommon for girls to be
married as early as they reach the age of thirteen or fourteen years.
The physical development of females in this climate is much in advance
of those in colder latitudes, and they become mothers in Brazil before
females in the United States are considered marriageable. Not only is
their vigor of frame thus impaired, but the cultivation of their minds
is in like manner arrested by the cares which must necessarily devolve
upon them, and really it seems that the evil of secluding females from
the freedom of society brings with it a host of other evils. If the
cause be corrected, the effects will be remedied as a natural
consequence.

Senor Barras very kindly proposed to furnish me letters to parties who
might aid me in the prosecution of my objects, and with the assurance of
his cordial good wishes we proceeded on our line of travel in the
afternoon.

After a pleasant ride of three miles across the country, in which the
Rio Claro was crossed, we reached the town known by the name of São João
de Rio Claro. It is constructed chiefly with one-story houses, after the
style of other interior towns through which we passed, yet there is more
of neatness in their appearance, and in the order of the streets, than
has been noted elsewhere.

We called, with a letter of introduction, upon Tenente Coronel Senor
José Estaninlaus D’Oliveiro, the commandant of the national guard for
this district.

He has recently proposed to give one hundred dollars to every citizen of
his district who would volunteer for the active service of the war.

When my mission was explained to him, he signified his readiness to aid
me, and said his house was open for me or any of my friends whenever it
might suit us to stop with him. He gave us an invitation to spend the
night at his house, but my object being to see as much of the country as
possible, I thanked him for his kind offer, and departed with his best
wishes.

In proceeding from Rio Claro we encountered the first open plains I had
seen, and with a poor sandy soil; there was scarcely grass sufficient to
sustain the cattle that were here and there scattered over these campo
lands.

For several miles the monotony was only broken by a few huge ant-hills,
that seemed to be the result of some considerable excavation of the
earth, and the inquiry was naturally suggested whether the people had
been digging for gold or making a well for water.

This striking contrast of barren plains, in close proximity to the
richest forest lands, is a very remarkable characteristic of this
section.

After passing a large area of this waste land, we reached another
fazenda of Senor José Vergueiro, called Angelica, where he awaited our
arrival, and repeated the kindly reception which had been extended to us
at Ybicaba. This place is ten miles from Rio Claro, and consists of
twenty-six thousand acres of land. Much of this large domain is campo
land, of little value; and yet there is an immense body of very valuable
land, a part being under cultivation in coffee, sugar-cane, cotton,
corn, rice, beans, &c., while there is yet a large portion of original
forest that is favorably located and of good quality.

The buildings on this place are of huge proportions, and the machinery
adapted to all the practical operations of the various departments of
industry. Water-power is used for a saw-mill, a grist-mill and a
coffee-mill, while oxen are employed in running a wooden mill for the
sugar-cane.

The facilities here for conducting the various kinds of business are not
equal to those at Ybicaba, yet the basis is here for indefinite
additions and improvements in the appliances, and the energy of the
proprietor is likely to render all its resources available for efficient
operation.

This place was formerly the family residence of the father and mother of
Senor Vergueiro, and the name, Angelica, is that of his mother.

His father was a man of considerable note, and was for a time regent of
the empire during the minority of the present Emperor. He has been dead
several years, and this property is held jointly by the heirs, but under
the control of the gentleman above-named, who expects to make it the
counterpart of Ybicaba.

Upon this place there is a mill-race, four miles long, but even then the
water reaches only midway the immense wheel, making it a breast-wheel,
however, of immense power, by the large column of water.

All the negroes came into the house to salute their master, with the
customary placing of hands together, and saying “Santa Christ,”[14]
which is an abbreviation for “Louvado seja nosso senhor Jesus Christ,”
that is said by almost every negro in meeting a white person.


                                          WEDNESDAY, _October 11, 1865_.

Having enjoyed a comfortable bed for the night, we had a cup of coffee
upon rising this morning, and afterwards joined Senor Vergueiro in
making an examination of a very substantial and neat residence of
sandstone, which has been recently erected on this place. The sandstone
is procured from a quarry located upon the lands of the fazenda, and
when dressed makes a very excellent wall. The general plan of the house
was made by Senor Vergueiro, but the services of an engineer named Shelb
have been called into requisition for the embellishments, and the result
is very creditable to both. Although the building is not large, it has
the lower story arranged for machinery, with a large water-wheel on the
side of the house, but so covered as not to attract the attention of one
taking an outside view of the building. This structure is an ornament to
the place, and indicates progress in the architectural designs of the
country.

We were shown here a plan of the lands belonging to this fazenda, which
had been executed by the above-named engineer. It displays all the
different kinds of soil, with the distinction of growth upon each; the
campo lands having a very scanty and scrubby growth, the matto virgem
being covered with the large original forest trees, and the capoeira
with small trees that have sprung up on land which was formerly under
cultivation. It is a large colored map, evidently made with great care,
after a regular survey of the premises, made by contract with the
proprietor.

After breakfast we rode out to take an extended view of the lands under
cultivation, and the woodlands that lay convenient for observation. On
the way, we passed the houses occupied by the colonists employed on this
place, and I counted twenty-four double houses, making forty-eight
tenements, for the separate families. Each family has a piece of ground
attached to the house, or located at a convenient distance, so that corn
and vegetables may be grown for their own use.

The contract with the proprietor only requires their services in
gathering coffee from the trees, and for this labor they are paid what
is considered to be one-half the value of the crude berries that are
gathered. The estimate placed upon an alqueric—corresponding to our
bushel—of the crude coffee berries, is seventy-five cents; and unless
the crop is good, ordinary hands do not gather more than two bushels per
day. Yet when the trees are very full, and the person is industrious and
skilful, from five to eight bushels may be gathered in one day.

The lands planted in coffee at this place are not of the best quality,
and yet the crop seems to have been fair, judging from those trees which
have not yet been gathered.

The corn and beans being but little above the ground, no estimate can be
formed as to what the crop may be; and the same in regard to rice which
has been planted. But the general impression received from riding
through the plantation was not particularly favorable to its fertility,
nor does the ground lie favorably for cultivation.

We rode through a large body of woodland, which gave indications of a
fair quality of soil, and lay very advantageously for cultivation. Yet
it is not of that purple aspect which characterizes the best soil; and I
do not see upon this place any of the terra rocha which abounds at
Ybicaba. I was led to infer that this was perhaps the most favorable
view which could be taken of the premises, as my proposition to traverse
the territory in another direction, in the afternoon, did not meet the
acquiescence of Senor Vergueiro, and yet he proposes to sell a part or
the whole of this extensive tract of land. He does not make known his
terms, and I don’t think that any portion of the vast area of this
fazenda fulfils the conditions for a desirable settlement.

Captain Carvalho, an old gentleman of sixty-five years of age, is the
administrator at Angelica; and seems to be treated with much respect by
the proprietor. He is regarded as the best authority respecting persons
or places within twenty miles of this fazenda, and has rendered us
important service in these respects. His wife is a young, hale, buxom
woman, who looks as if she might welcome another husband at the demise
of this frail old man. She did not take a seat at the table with us, nor
did she make her appearance often in the room. The women of this medium
class of people have not usually presented themselves when we have
visited their houses, nor are they ever seen at the table during meals.

I wrote a long communication from this place for the information of my
friends, which was sent to my wife, along with a private letter to her.


                                           THURSDAY, _October 12, 1865_.

Having secured a guide for the various parts of the country which we
expected to visit, we left Angelica this morning, and came a distance of
twelve miles to the fazenda of Senor João Ribeiro de Santos Carmargo. A
letter from him was given to his administrator, Senor Antonio, who
seemed at the outset to be at a loss what disposition to make of us and
our rather large retinue. Ere long, however, we got into the house, and
our baggage being brought in, he gave directions for the care of the
stock. We soon found, also, that arrangements were in a state of
progress for giving us dinner, which proved to be a good substantial
meal.

In the afternoon he conducted us to a portion of woodland, also to a
field planted recently with coffee trees, and having a crop of corn and
beans interspersed with it.

I was surprised to find this soil very superior to that about the
location of the building, and was impressed with the importance of
making a thorough investigation of the adjacent territory. We went in a
southeasterly direction to the foot of the serra, through a virgin
forest of three miles in extent, and most of the growth indicated
fruitfulness of the soil. At this point, the land under cultivation
presented a good appearance, and the old corn-stalks showed a good
result for the past year. There was also between this and the woods some
open pasture, which had a fine crop of grass, and we suggested that our
animals be sent here to graze, while we should be furnished from the
fazenda for to-morrow’s ride.


                                             FRIDAY, _October 13, 1865_.

Mounted upon the plantation-mules, we rode at an early hour with Senor
Antonio to visit the plantation, which runs along the foot of the serra,
in an easterly direction from the site of the houses. The coffee trees
were the chief objects of interest, and presented the aspect of vigorous
development. Most of them had been stripped entirely or partially, and
no correct opinion could be formed as to their yield from the statements
of the man in charge.

A small piece of land had been planted last year in cotton, and the
stalks, which had been cut off preparatory to another crop, indicated
only a moderate development. There was a considerable extent of ground
open for pasture that lay favorably for cultivation, and from the size
of the old, deadened trees still standing upon it, the prospect would be
good for a yield of cotton.

Within a half-mile from the foot of the serra, for more than a mile in
length, the soil was of a reddish aspect, with a considerable proportion
of sand, and as it receded beyond this distance from the serra, the
increase of sand was such as to render the soil unproductive.

In all directions around the houses of this fazenda a barren campo
extends to a considerable distance, and the land is not even suitable
for pasture, as the grass which grows upon it is not eaten by the horses
or cows to any extent, nor does it prove nutritious.

After returning from this visit to the coffee field, we were joined by
Major Manuel Reginaldo de Morars Salles, who breakfasted with us, and
then showed us another extensive portion of the lands. Taking the main
road towards the southeast, upon which we started yesterday evening, we
continued upon it, as the boundary of the land, for two miles.

Though the trees growing along this line, for more than a mile from the
point of divergence yesterday evening, were large and numerous, yet the
sand predominated in an increasing ratio, rendering the soil of little
value. We then travelled for three miles through a barren campo,
constituting the border of the tract, when a virgin forest was entered,
through which we rode about half a mile into the better quality of land
near the serra. Here the land was productive, but was very irregular,
and liable to wash under cultivation, as there was more or less sand
mixed with it. We did not find here, as at the northern portion of the
serra, that dark red soil which always has more solidity than the sandy
soil, and, hence, less liability to wash away by the rains.

From this point we emerged, on a different line from that by which we
entered, and soon encountered a sterile region following round the
border of the tract for a mile, through a complete waste of sandy campo
land.

We at length came to a considerable stream, upon which there is an
advantageous site for machinery, and were the better quality of lands
near this point, the facility for securing this fine water-power would
constitute quite a recommendation to the place. But the desirable lands
are all at some miles distance, and a very bad route for the
construction of roads from them to this point. We encountered at a house
here a grove of delicious oranges, upon which we all feasted to our
utmost capacity.

Reviewing the impressions of yesterday evening and to-day, I would
conjecture that this body of land extends about six miles in length from
northwest to southeast, and that its average width from the serra was
two and a half miles, making nine thousand and six hundred acres of
land. Of this, I would consider one-third as utterly worthless, and
another third as only suited for pasturage, while the remaining three
thousand and two hundred acres is good land, and lies advantageously for
cultivation.

The administrator stated that there were seventy thousand (70,000)
coffee trees bearing fruit, and twenty thousand (20,000) trees which
have been planted at different times within the past two years, while
there are ten thousand (10,000) plants recently set out. Of course, the
value of the property is increased by the growth of these coffee trees,
as every tree bearing fruit makes an annual income, and the estimated
value of each plant when it commences to yield is twenty cents.

The territory over which we have passed has many small streams of water
convenient to the different sections of the land, and the water was
clear and pleasant to drink.

The land under cultivation lies in two separate localities, and yet both
near the serra. The most elevated grounds in this country seem to be the
most fertile, having, in the best localities, a dark red loamy soil;
while the level lands, either in low flats or in plateaus, are composed
largely of sand, and have little adaptation to agricultural purposes.
The chief growth upon the campos are a harsh grass and a wild fern, with
here and there a few scrubby trees of small size.[15]


                                           SATURDAY, _October 14, 1865_.

We arose at daylight this morning and getting a cup of coffee rode five
miles through campo lands, to the Rio Roque, (River Rock.) At the point
visited another small stream, with a five-mile site, runs into this
river; and should any one locate near this place it would be available
for machinery requiring but little water-power.

Senor Antonio Rodriguez Foone, the administrator, who was specially
charged with the duty of showing us these lands, referred to an old
woman living in a house near by, and was told by her that the lands
beyond the Rio Roque belonged to the property; and as he supposed the
property extended up the western side, we preferred to explore this
without crossing the river. We rode up for nearly a mile, and found that
the nature of the soil and the configuration of the surface were very
well adapted for cultivation. The timber upon it is large, and much of
it having a long, straight trunk, which would adapt it admirably for
building. The soil near the road is of that dark red loamy order which
is considered the most productive in the country. This taken in
connection with the more elevated woodlands lying on the opposite side
of the stream, would form a good settlement for several families, and
the general aspects are favorable for health.

After returning from this visit we passed through a body of land lying
in a southwest course from the buildings, and about one mile distant. It
lies very favorably, and is evidently superior to most of the lands on
this place. The soil is that dark red loam which constitutes terra
rocha, and the timber is much the same as that of the land described
upon the Roque. If there is any considerable extent of these lands they
would form an offset to the larger proportion of worthless land
belonging to this fazenda. On this point, as on others connected with
dimensions, our guide could give me no information, so that I am left to
the broad domain of surmise.

In forming an approximate estimate of the lands traversed this morning,
I am without any other criterion than the probabilities based upon what
I saw and what Senor Antonio supposed to be the outline of the fazenda.

The figures used in my calculation for the other portion of the land
will correspond very well to my ideas of the extent of territory here,
and we may say it is six miles long by two and a half miles wide, making
nine thousand six hundred acres. The land previously spoken of lies
westward and northward from the houses, and making a line from the
southern end of the serra across by the buildings to the boundary,
leaves all the land south and east to be included in the observation of
this morning.

This entire area does not perhaps contain over two thousand acres of
productive land,[16] and the rest is of a quality that cannot be made
available for any practical object, save it might be for a glass
factory, from the immense beds of sand accumulated on this barren waste.

We left Morro Grande, the fazenda of Senor João, and went twenty miles
northwest to the house of Captain Feliciana.


                                             SUNDAY, _October 15, 1865_.

Having enjoyed the plain and substantial hospitality of our old friend
the Capitão, as men who are hungry and tired always do, we saw no reason
for detention during the day, and set out at an early hour, accompanied
by our host, to the fazenda of Senor Dom Francisco Antonio de Sonza
Queiroz.

A dignified and yet courteous reception was soon followed by the
assignment to very comfortable quarters, and the furnishing of a most
excellent breakfast.

His own wife, and the wife of Senor Dom Francisco Aguiar de Barros,
graced the table with their presence; and the style of every thing
indicated the refinement and elegance of the families. The gentlemen
were so situated at the table as to separate their wives from the
guests, which seems to be one of the relics of the olden times that
clings to the people of the best class.

These two gentlemen own lands adjoining each other, and both having
recently opened up their fazendas, Dom Barros has not yet got his
buildings arranged for his residence; and his wife being a sister of Dom
Queiroz the families are living together.

Every thing about the establishment is conducted with much neatness and
good taste; and the dinner table, with its rich service of silver and
variety of dishes, had an air of completeness that would do credit to
any society. Our tea-table, also, was a type of the best order of
things; and, though the ladies left before the retiring of the
gentlemen, it must have been a great relief to get away when not
partaking in the conversation. With this class of people tea is not
served until half-past eight o’clock; and after the table is cleared the
party sit around and chat until the hour of retiring for the night. When
a social group are thrown with one another at tea, this is doubtless
very pleasant; but not understanding much that was said on the part of
others, and disliking to call upon Mr. Bennaton to interpret commonplace
remarks either from myself or others, I found this tarrying around the
tea-table quite a patience-trying ordeal.

I observe here, as elsewhere, that there is a long, slim pole erected in
the front yard, with an emblem of some saint on a piece of cloth in a
frame, attached to the top of the pole. They are called saint-poles, and
the figure is changed in commemoration of each particular saint’s day.

At every house that has been passed or visited, without distinction of
the class of people, where Roman Catholics reside, this emblem of their
faith is to be seen. Though the figures are usually of the most uncouth
aspect and clumsy execution, it is supposed that holy associations cling
around them, and they are retained even when tattered and defaced by the
elements.

In connection with this it is particularly becoming to refer to the
habit among the negroes, which has attracted my attention at several of
the fazendas, and which was observed here this evening. After the
forming of all in a line, for the purpose of counting them at night,
they repaired to the rear apartment of the building, occupied by the
family, and all kneeling down they rehearsed a religious service, in
which they were lead by one of their number. After this all retired to
their respective lodgings for the night.

I observed that a similar proceeding was conducted in the yard where the
negroes were mustered or formed into line, at the fazenda of Senor João
Robiero de Santos Carmargo, and it is doubtless a part of the routine
whenever any considerable number of negroes are collected.

Were it really a service of the heart, and not a mere outward ceremony,
there would be an appropriateness and impressive solemnity in thus
looking to God for his blessing at the close of the day’s labor.

But while a few of the number may have some sense of reverence for God
associated with this daily observance, it is evident that the greater
part join in it as a mere matter of routine.

The mustering and counting of the negroes at night is usually done in
front of the residence of the owner, and he thus has the assurance that
all are present. I learn that the habit of running away is not uncommon
here, and at some places the sound of the shackles has been heard when
the negroes were assembled, though nothing of the kind was brought to my
attention in this establishment.

In some instances the shackles are put on their ankles only at night to
keep them in their quarters, while in others they are kept on while at
work as a matter of punishment, and I saw at one fazenda a very old
woman with shackles on her ankles while she was employed in stirring the
coffee that was drying. She had been guilty of poisoning other negroes,
and was regarded as a very dangerous person to go at large.

My observation of slavery in this country leads me to the conclusion
that the exactions from the negro are greater, and the provision for his
subsistence and comfort less than was experienced formerly in the United
States.


                                             MONDAY, _October 16, 1865_.

After a pleasant rest for the night, we were regaled this morning before
rising with a most excellent cup of coffee, which, it will be observed,
is a part of the hospitality in every well-regulated household.

In due course of time our breakfast came, and, along with other
articles, we enjoyed “Café corn leite” and excellent corn bread, made of
fine meal.

This “Café corn leite” is prepared by boiling the milk with the coffee,
and is so great an improvement upon the simple mixture of milk or cream
with coffee that it ought to be resorted to generally by our people who
are fond of this combination for breakfast.

Being supplied with horses by our host, we rode out with him to see his
newly-opened plantation, called Fazenda Nova, passing in our route the
site he has selected for building upon, whenever time is allowed for
erecting a family residence. His brickyard and saw-mill are in
successful operation, and the latter is a well-arranged perpendicular
saw, that performs admirably, even in the hard material of the timber in
all this country.

I have as yet seen no instance of a circular saw in operation here, and
it certainly would be better adapted to the compact and hard wood which
has to be encountered in sawing.

The coffee trees on this place have all been set out within the past two
years, and some of them have been planted very recently. In all there
are one hundred and forty thousand, and the number is still to be
extended.

The lands under cultivation are, for the most part, elevated, and of the
dark red terra rocha, being of very superior quality for the coffee.

We visited also the newly-opened fazenda[17] of Senor Dom Barros, and I
there had the opportunity of witnessing the burning of a “roça,” or new
ground, of twelve acres, upon which the timber had been simply felled
and partially dried. The land being scraped around to prevent extension
of the fire, all the negroes were posted at regular intervals to guard
the progress of the conflagration, and the fallen timber was then fired
in various places.

It was an interesting sight, as illustrating the custom of all the
planters in Brazil for preparing their lands to receive the seed for the
first time; and, with the heat of a boiling sun, in addition to the heat
of the fire, I found that “distance lends enchantment to the view.”

In riding through the sun to-day I was more affected by its heat than at
any time previously, and though it may look something like adopting the
doctrine of “Similia similibus curantur,” I resorted to the use of
strong coffee, with decidedly good result. At the new structure of Senor
Barros we found excellent coffee prepared for us, and with a sense of
depression from my exposure to the hot sun, I drank two cups of the
ordinary size in the United States, which relieved me greatly; and, upon
going out again, I did not experience so much inconvenience from the
heat, though the sun was beaming down its rays with even greater
intensity than before. This stimulant evidently lessened the influence
of the sun.

The thermometer stands to-night at 80° Fahrenheit, and was doubtless 90°
at two o’clock P. M., as it is very sensibly cooler since the sun
disappeared, while a pleasant breeze always fans the earth at night.

Some valuable information was received from Dom Queiroz to-day, in
regard to the employment by contract, of men having negroes under their
control, from the province of Minas. These negroes have been heretofore
employed upon coffee estates which have ceased to be profitable in that
section, and the owners are sending them to this comparatively new
region, under responsible overseers, to contract with the landowners for
their labor. They go into the virgin forest, clear it up after the style
of the country, and plant young coffee trees furnished by the landowner,
which are to be cared for, and the intervening space of land cultivated
on their own account during four years; at the end of which time, the
field is turned over to the owner, with the coffee trees yielding fruit.

In consideration of this service, the landowner pays to the contractor
twenty cents for each coffee tree which is growing and ready to yield;
and if any cash is advanced to him prior to the end of the fourth year,
he gives guarantees for the fulfilment of his stipulation, and pays
twelve per cent. per annum interest upon the money thus received. The
contractor supplies himself with tools, and his hands with provisions,
or other articles needed, so that the landowner is not responsible in
any way for them.

During the first two years, the contractor may plant whatever crop he
chooses between the rows of the coffee trees, but the owner has the
right to dictate what shall be planted in the subsequent two years; and
as the growth of the plants may be impaired by the presence of high corn
or other things calculated to shade them, these may be forbidden.

Should the coffee commence yielding before the expiration of the four
years, the contractor obligates himself to gather the crop, and turn
over one-half of it to the owner of the land.

The advantage to the contractor consists in having the use of land for
four years, in consideration of clearing it, and the twenty cents per
tree is very full pay for the labor and attention bestowed upon the
coffee plants.

On the other hand, the owner, having a large amount of land without
sufficient force to do all this heavy work, gets his land put in good
order for cultivation, and has the coffee trees upon it bearing fruit.
Considering that four hundred and sixteen (416) trees grow upon one acre
of ground, his improved land costs him eighty-three dollars ($83) per
acre; and the question arises, could not day-laborers have been employed
throughout this period for the same outlay of money, who would have
given the owner the annual return from the cultivation of the lands, in
addition to the final growth of the coffee trees?

I learn that one man can clear and plant in the course of a year ten
acres of land, and the same man can of course cultivate it in a crop of
provisions during subsequent years. This man can be hired to work, and
find himself, certainly at one dollar a day for the working days of the
year, which may be put down at three hundred dollars, which for four
years will be twelve hundred dollars.

For this amount, I have had my annual provisions from the land, and my
coffee trees are now ready to yield me an annual crop. If this sum now
is reduced by subtracting the value of the crop for each of the three
last years, at the rate of thirty dollars per acre for each year, making
nine hundred dollars, it leaves but three hundred dollars of outlay for
my coffee trees; or thirty dollars per acre, instead of the eighty-three
dollars per acre paid out by the system of contract.

In this point of view, it is evident that our friend Dom Queiroz and
others who make this arrangement with the negro contractors are paying
very exorbitant rates of hire. I have purposely placed the rate of
day-labor far above the rate usually paid in this country; and it is not
usual to pay a caipira or Portuguese more than five dollars a month, and
furnish him lodging and provisions, which in cash outlay will not exceed
one-half of the sum specified in my calculations.

It behooves our people to consider all these things in making their
arrangements, and not fall into any plan of operations because others
are doing it.

In estimating the increased value of lands, with a full stand of coffee
trees bearing fruit, the calculation may with more propriety be based
upon the estimate of twenty cents per tree, because you receive an
immediate return for the investment, of from three to six pounds of
coffee per tree, annually, which will be worth, free of all expense,
twenty cents the first year for each tree, and thus repay the entire
outlay.

One of the incidents of travel in this country has been encountered
to-night, by finding a bicho or chigre embedded in one of my toes. A
little darkey was called to identify the parasite; and a “tropeiro”
extracted it, with the nidus complete, making a very nice operation.


                                            TUESDAY, _October 17, 1865_.

Leaving our pleasant associations at Nova Fazenda this morning, we came
in company with Dom Queiroz and Captain Feliciana to the residence of
Senor João Franco da Morars. He had a most sumptuous breakfast in
readiness for us, which was enjoyed very much after our ride of six
miles across the country.

Setting out after 10 o’clock, we rode over the land which this gentleman
proposes to sell. The extensive tract of Babylonia is connected at one
point with the land upon which he resides. The former consists of ten
thousand and two hundred (10,200) acres, and the latter of three
thousand (3,000) acres, making together thirteen thousand two hundred
(13,200) acres of land.

The body of land known as Babylonia consists of the possessions of a
number of persons, as follows:

João Franco da Morars, 3,540 acres; José da Lacerda Guimarans, 3,600
acres; Aranjo Lima, 420 acres; José Goncalves, 840 acres; José Estivão,
780 acres; Prudenta, 540 acres; José Ignacio, 252 acres; Bento Ribeiro,
252 acres; and the residence of João Franco da Morars, 3,000 acres.

Price of lands in Babylonia, $4.50 per acre.

Price of residence of Senor João, $5.00 per acre.

Between the last-named and the rest of the land there intervenes
partially a portion of another fazenda, called Quilombo, which it is
thought can be had upon similar terms as the above.

The stream Ribeirão dos Negros forms the boundary for a short distance
upon the north of the first-named tract, and then penetrates the lands
of Babylonia; supplying water convenient to other portions, and having
several considerable falls which might be made available for any extent
of machinery.

The surface of the land is irregular, and in some parts mountainous,
inclining from either side towards the water, which traverses the entire
extent of the lands. Upon the tract enumerated as that of José Goncalves
there is an elevated plateau of perhaps one hundred acres which lies
favorably, and has a stream of water running across it through an
artificial channel. By means of this small stream a monjolo is worked at
two different places; and the soil is of good quality, while the site
for building is very advantageous. Upon a portion of this plateau,
twenty thousand (20,000) coffee plants are growing from the seed, which
are two years old and look thriving, but are still small. When the seed
are planted in the places where the tree is to grow, it is thought to
have some advantages; yet the almost universal custom is to transplant
from a nursery the rundas or young sprouts when they have remained for
one year, and thus the stand is perhaps rendered more certain and
uniform.

If several families should combine in purchasing these lands, a hamlet
or village might be formed upon the plateau spoken of, and each have
sufficient ground in connection with their dwellings to raise vegetables
and necessary supplies. Those employed as laborers could be located upon
their respective tracts of land, and thus be separated from their
dwellings. In this way children might have a common school, and many
arrangements for the common benefit of the families could be made
convenient to this site, while the water could be carried to any point
it might be desired. The soil upon most of the hillsides is of good
quality and free from frost, so as to be suitable for planting coffee.

Tobacco was seen growing upon this place, as a second crop from the
stalks which had been previously cut off, and though the result did not
appear favorable, it would repay the trouble of gathering. This region
produces tobacco very satisfactorily; and the neighboring section of
Belem (a contraction of Bethlehem) is regarded as particularly well
suited for the culture of this plant. The mode of preparing the tobacco
for market, here and elsewhere in the country, is to work it into a kind
of rope, with the hands, that is, coiled round a piece of wood two and a
half or three feet long, so that it may be conveniently shipped upon the
pack-mules. It presents a very dark, oily aspect, as if some foreign
ingredient were used in its preparation, and yet this is said to be
simply the exudation of the juice, which results from the manipulation.
This tobacco is strong, but not regarded as equal in quality to that
manufactured in Virginia; and my friends who used tobacco attributed
this inferiority to the want of proper treatment in this Brazilian
twist.

In other provinces of Brazil, more northward, I am informed that the
leaf-tobacco is packed in bales, and shipped largely to England and
other places, for making segars, or for other processes of manufacture
that enhance its value.

The soil and climate are said to be well adapted to the growth of
tobacco in all parts of the country.


                                          WEDNESDAY, _October 18, 1865_.

We parted from our old friend Captain Feliciana, the courteous and kind
Dom Queiroz, and our host, Senor Franco, at nine o’clock this morning.

Captain Feliciana is a plain, unassuming, genteel person, who has
manifested his regard for us by going the entire round with us since
leaving his own premises, and though over fifty-five years of age, he
manifests considerable activity in exploring the country, and has really
been of much service to us in communicating information of this region.

Dom Queiroz speak a little English, and relieved my embarrassment by the
gentleness and urbanity of his bearing towards me during our sojourn at
his house and our association subsequently. When I bade him good-bye, he
said, in terms that required premeditation, with his limited use of
English, “If I can be of any service to you at any time, call upon me.
You will find me here, ready to serve you; and I am at your orders.”

Under other circumstances, this might have been viewed as a mere passing
remark; but, having found him so unassuming in his hospitality
previously, this kindness manifested at our parting was highly
appreciated.

Our host, Senor Franco, has manifested the greatest generosity in
supplying our wants, and also in providing for our animals and
attendants.

He had a very interesting daughter, who had met us at the outset in the
dining-room, and at each meal subsequently, causing us to take quite an
interest in her dignified management during the indisposition of her
mother. When we were ready to leave the house, Mr. Bennaton asked for
her, and we shook hands with her, and gave her our best wishes at
parting.

Senor Franco said that I would come with my friends to live amongst
them, if I knew how much gratification it would afford the people of the
country.

He kindly sent a negro man with us, to pilot the road, and we reached
the residence of Senor Maj. Joaquim Roberto de Silveira at 4 o’clock P.
M.; we got dinner promptly, but there being no corn on the place for our
stock, he sent off to a neighbor, and after some hours procured only
half a bushel, which affords but half a feed for night and morning.

He has recently settled this place, and has not yet made a crop of corn,
which explains very satisfactorily his deficiency; but it was supposed
that others in the neighborhood would have made a crop of corn, and
could have responded to his call in a larger quantity than he procured.
In asking him to procure the corn, Mr. Bennaton expected to pay for it,
but he would receive nothing for it, and accommodated us, as all have
done, in the true spirit of hospitality.

This section of country presents an admixture of campo and forest lands;
the former being a light, sandy, barren waste; while the latter vary
considerably in quality. Most of the woodland seen to-day was near the
premises of our host, and though it looked as if cotton might be grown
advantageously, there was a large element of sand, which predisposed it
to wash, when there was much irregularity of surface. It had a dark gray
aspect, and corresponded more to the character of soil seen in some
parts of South Carolina than any land yet seen in Brazil, and may
produce equally well.


                                           THURSDAY, _October 19, 1865_.

After an early breakfast, we were supplied with a negro guide by Major
Silveira, and travelling through a region that was almost entirely
campo, we proceeded twelve miles to the residence of Senor Major José
Maria Gavião, at São José.

In his absence, we were kindly received by his family; and upon his
arrival, we had the strongest demonstration of his generous hospitality.
He not only treated us with the best he had to eat and drink, but
supplied us with fine horses to ride over his plantation.

He has only established himself here a few years, and yet his
arrangements are very complete. He has a large tract of land lying
remarkably well for cultivation, and very fair soil, though not of the
best quality. It is free from frost, and thought to be well suited for
coffee culture. He has one hundred and twenty thousand coffee plants of
different ages already planted, and is ready to extend the number when
he has rains to favor transplanting.

He has a good saw-mill, with perpendicular saw, which works very
satisfactorily. He has also a grist-mill that makes beautiful corn-meal;
and really it is refreshing to see the meal instead of farina, which is
the substitute in most of the parts of the country for bread.

We availed ourselves of the fine bathing facilities at the mill to
refresh our persons, and put on clean clothes. The Major sent down large
towels for us, and provided likewise a bottle of Cognac, for us to take
a little after concluding the bath, to prevent any bad effects of the
cold water. Bathing in this climate is not only very grateful to our
bodies but it is regarded essential to health and comfort.

I here had an opportunity of enjoying for the first time a feast of that
delicious fruit, the jaboticaba. It is a large, dark purple fruit,
resembling very much the appearance and taste of the finest specimens of
muscodine, but the average size is somewhat larger than the largest
muscodine, and the juice is even sweeter and more delicate than that of
the muscodine. It is regarded entirely free from danger, when the juice
alone is eaten, and many swallow the pulp also without experiencing any
inconvenience. This fruit is an anomaly in its location upon the body of
the trees, or upon the larger limbs, by a very short, delicate
attachment, and is not found upon the twigs or ends of the branches as
other fruits. The tree producing it is a tall, smooth, light-yellow
colored forest growth; and in riding out to the woods, a negro ascended
one of them and gathered a quantity of the fruit. It grows also when
transplanted, and makes a beautiful shade-tree for a yard, while bearing
the choicest fruit.

I ate at the house, likewise, the cassia, which is a fruit produced in
the campos, and has a very pleasant acidulous taste, that is found very
good when used as a lemonade with water. This fruit has the peculiarity
of producing the seed at the lower end, exterior to the investment.
Though found upon a small shrub in the campo, it is grown under
cultivation upon a large tree, and of much larger size and finer flavor.

We were shown here a small hand-roller cotton-cleaner, which is the only
reliance thus far for a gin. A small spinning jinney of the old pattern
is also used; and the mortar and pestle are employed for beating big
hominy.


                                             FRIDAY, _October 20, 1865_.

We rode out this morning before breakfast to the location of a small
colony of Brazilians, employed by Major Gavião in cultivating his lands.
Most of them own some slaves, and they are also employed upon the place.
As the sole object in these arrangements seems to be for the coffee
culture, the contract with the proprietor leaves them free to cultivate
the intervening ground for themselves, and the consequence is, that
their cribs are full of corn, while the proprietor has to buy his supply
from the country around. They have hogs, also, in fine order, and every
thing about their little settlement looks to be in a thriving state. In
addition to this, the laborer is paid five cents per year for each
coffee plant that he sets out and gets to growing, thus having a good
cash income, independent of the supply of provisions. This principle
works well for the contractor, but is certainly not favorable for the
landowner, as he certainly should avail himself of some part, at least,
of the productions of the land, during the period it is occupied by the
contractor or colonist, as he is, in this instance.

I observed at the house of Major Gavião a negro man with an indolent
ulcer of the hand, which he was treating with acid nitrate of mercury,
in the absence of any physician. I thought this quite heroic domestic
practice, yet it was evidently a proper application, and I indorsed his
treatment.

The negroes here, as at other places, were observed to labor in ditching
without their shirts; and though this strikes one strangely upon first
seeing it, the negro evidently consults his own comfort, as the shirt is
usually tied round the waist. So far as I have had an opportunity of
examining the clothing of negroes, the men wear a substantial shirt and
pants of coarse cotton, and it is rare that one has been seen with
ragged clothes. The women usually wear lighter material, and it is not
uncommon to see a female servant about a house with an old calico dress,
which has doubtless been cast aside by the white women of the family.

I was particularly impressed here with the freedom which was allowed
some negro children in coming into the room occupied by the family, and
with the attention given them by the Major.

Having no children of his own, he seems to make pets of these little
darkies. He has likewise a number of huge dogs, which are very fond of
lying about the house, and he tolerates them at times, but at others
makes a clearing out of every thing, and closes an open-work door, which
serves as a barrier to their entrance.

After a late breakfast, the dashing Major accompanied us a short
distance, and left us with a guide to show us the route to the fazenda
of Senor Dom Rafael Aguiar Paes de Barros.

He and his fine-looking wife received us most courteously and treated us
very kindly. Upon being informed that I wished to look at any lands in
the neighborhood which might be for sale, the Dom supplied us with
horses, and rode with us to see some lands near his place. The soil
appeared to be of superior quality, and the surface was remarkably
smooth and level for this country, but there is not such a supply of
springs as would be desirable for the use of families, and the only
stream available for machinery is of small capacity.

The lands are bounded upon one side by the Rio Jacaré, the margins of
which are said to be very liable to chill and fever, and have not been
cleared up for cultivation. There is not sufficient fall in any part of
this stream adjacent to the land for establishing any kind of machinery.

There is, however, an immense salto or water-fall upon the river
Chimbarro, which runs near one end of the territory, but belongs to
another party, who manifests no wish to sell. This water-power might be
used for machinery of any magnitude, and the location would be a good
one for a cotton factory, to work up the crude material of the country,
and sell the proceeds to the people within adjoining districts.

The following are the tracts of land in the market:

        João Baptista Lacenda                      6,000 acres.
        José Rodriguez                             1,500 acres.
        Donna Maria (Mai de Major Joaquim Roberto) 1,200 acres.
        The first can be bought for about               $5,000.
        The second can be bought for about              $3,000.
        The last can be bought for about                $2,500.

These lands lie in juxtaposition to each other, so that they would
together form a fine large plantation, and one good settlement, or
perhaps more could be secured. The average of the whole makes the price
one dollar and twenty cents per acre, and I have seen no body of land
presenting such favorable conditions for a fazenda, though not adapted
to a number of small settlements.

This territory lies eight miles south of Araraquara, and a considerable
proportion of the two last-named tracts have been at one time cleared
and under cultivation. But it is evident that it was not materially
impaired, and it is again covered with a growth of taquara (a species of
cane) and small trees of various kinds, which would be much more readily
cleared off than the original forest.

This land is said to have been planted seven years ago in corn and
beans, for the purpose of fattening hogs to be driven to market; but
this trade being no longer profitable, it was abandoned, and the land
allowed to grow up as stated.

The altitude of this region renders it very pleasant for a residence,
and yet its exemption from frost enables the coffee to be cultivated
successfully.

Dom Barros has already a portion of land adjoining these lands planted
in coffee, which looks to be thriving well, though not old enough to
bear fruit. I saw upon his place corn-stalks, that indicated its
adaptation to this important crop, and pumpkins of good size were also
seen in the field amongst the corn. He cultivates the sugar-cane very
successfully, and has a large mill, in which he is constantly working
it, with a firm yield of sugar and rum. The molasses is very little made
anywhere I have been, and yet when produced is of the very finest
quality. It is not used as we use it, in connection with the
substantials of a meal, but is confined to use with the dessert, and is
a most delicious syrup.

If the water-power upon the Chimbarro can be secured, in connection with
these lands, it then becomes a very desirable investment, and as Dom
Barros brings the water for his machinery from this stream, through a
race two miles long, it may be that a privilege could be had from the
owner, though he may not sell the land.

After an excellent dinner, at which Senorha presided, much after the
style of our southern ladies, we were supplied with a guide by Dom
Barros, and came to the villa of Araraquara. Having a letter to Senor
Manuel Francisco de Oliveira, we were kindly received and well provided
for at his house. I was informed that a letter had been addressed to me
by the municipal authorities of this place, inviting me to visit the
district, and that the people throughout the country were very desirous
that we should select a location amongst them. Several gentlemen called
upon us, and among them the municipal Judge, to whom I had a letter of
introduction—Senor Dom Andre Dias de Aguiar. This gentleman impressed me
very favorably by his courteous manner and his intelligent expression of
countenance, while he manifested quite an interest in the objects of my
visit, and my personal gratification.

The villa of Araraquara is located upon a plateau, which affords ample
scope for extension of the town; and there is a clear bold brook running
on one side of it, which affords fine water for domestic purposes and
for the use of all kinds of stock. The streets are laid off at right
angles, with a church and an open space in front of it in the centre of
the population. I observed that there was a jail opposite the church,
and yet I was informed that it was not much in demand for criminals. The
style of architecture is similar to the mud-built houses seen elsewhere,
being nearly all of a single story, and consequently spread over a large
area, when any considerable house-room is secured. The drinking water
here is superior, and the climate very pleasant.


                                           SATURDAY, _October 21, 1865_.

Senor Candido Mariano Barba, the government agent at this place, called
upon us early this morning, and manifested a desire to aid me in any way
it might be practicable.[18]

It being arranged that we should go out to the fazenda of Senor Lenente
Coronel Joaquim Lorenço Correa, several of the gentlemen of the villa
rode out with us. Meeting the proprietor on the way, he joined us and
conducted us to his extensive and well-arranged establishment, known as
São Lorenço. On the way, we passed a beautiful cascade of several
hundred feet in height, and then another near his place, which is also a
fall of great elevation, but not containing so much water as the former.
The lands adjacent to these water-falls are comparatively level, but
drop down suddenly in a gorge, whose banks are precipitous for a
considerable distance, as the stream descends. I observed this same
thing on the premises of Dom Barros, and it is rather a striking
peculiarity of the country.

The fazenda of Senor Joaquim is four miles from the villa, and passing
in part through red campo land, the forest is entered within a mile of
the residence, and the soil here is of superior quality. The best
sugar-cane yet seen was observed on the roadside as we approached the
residence, and I learned from the owner that it had been growing several
years from the original roots. He finds that the cane produces here,
satisfactorily, six years; and after that time it is customary to plant
the ground anew.

This establishment belongs to the first class of the country, and the
dwelling is located upon a gentle slope, with a paved terrace, elevated
to correspond to the level of the house. The residence is very
commodious, with a basement story, which adds greatly to convenience,
and the general reception room is supplied with sofas and chairs, having
cane seats, and of very neat workmanship. The usual plan of having the
sleeping apartment opening into the parlor is found here also, and there
is no ventilation excepting by this door. The outbuildings are
well-arranged and of the most substantial construction, and the yard
immediately around the house is inclosed with a fence, while outside of
this there extends for half a mile on one side a most luxuriant
grass-pasture.

At a short distance from the dwelling stands a grist-mill, saw-mill and
sugar-mill, moved by water, which is brought in a race from an adjacent
stream. The sugar-house is supplied with metallic cylinders to express
the juice of the cane, and the quantity extracted gives a favorable idea
of the richness of the growth of cane, while the syrup indicates by its
taste a large proportion of saccharine matter. He has three large
boilers of sheet copper placed in a furnace that is neat and
substantial, while it works most efficiently. There are small troughs
connecting these boilers with the large receiving-troughs, in which the
syrup stands to crystallize, and the process of transforming the syrup
is thus attended with little difficulty. After the sugar has formed, it
is then placed in other receivers with perforations in the bottom, so
that it drips and becomes dry.

The sugar is then submitted to a process of clarifying by covering it
with a compost of clay and cow-dung, which seems to act favorably in
rendering the superficial layers of sugar very fair, and indeed almost
white. This is entirely new to me, and yet may have been resorted to in
the sugarmaking regions of the United States without coming to my
knowledge.

The drippings from the sugar are converted into rum, which is known here
by the name of aqua-ardente, or cachaça, and this branch of the business
is quite profitable, as a market is found in the country near at hand.

The sale, however, of most of the sugar made at this establishment, is
readily effected in this and the adjoining districts, at the prices of
Rio with addition of transportation; so that, though laboring under the
apparent disadvantage of remoteness from any established market, there
is really a very decided benefit in this location. He gets a higher
price at his sugar-house than the manufacturers who ship to Rio or
Santos can possibly get at those points, as his consumers must pay for
the transportation on pack-mules, if they should go there to purchase.
Moreover, I am strongly impressed with the conviction that the cane and
the appliances used in this establishment, with the high-toned character
of the proprietor, will furnish inducements to buyers that may not be
found elsewhere. He produces annually for the market between eighty and
ninety thousand pounds of sugar, for which he gets an average of seven
and a half cents per pound. Let us make a calculation for eighty-five
thousand pounds at seven and a half cents per pound, and it gives
$6,375, from which deduct $1,375 for expenses, and we have five thousand
dollars profit.

He employs only about fifteen hands, and raises besides all the corn,
beans, and other provisions for his family, and also all the hogs which
are required on his place. Every thing which can make life comfortable
seems to be raised in the greatest abundance on this place, and he lives
to a large extent within himself; but yet avails himself likewise of
such importations as are requisite for success in working his fazenda,
or for the comfort of his family. His family consists of seven daughters
and five sons, and when one is married, or arrives at the age of
twenty-one years, he gives this son or daughter three thousand dollars
upon which to commence business. Four of his daughters are married, and
two of his sons, while one of his sons being in the military service at
the seat of war, leaves at home three daughters and two sons. The entire
family excepting the older son at home, present a very robust and
healthy aspect, and the constitutional stamina of the old gentleman and
old lady are not surpassed in any country. The son at home, whose health
suffered in the army, so that he was discharged from service, is now
recovering his vigor, but has not the appearance of a good constitution
like the rest of the family.

The party rode out in the afternoon to visit the coffee field (cafézar)
of his son-in-law, Senor Francisco de Paula Coma e Silva. He has some
twenty thousand trees of various ages, and those most advanced
indicating good development, with a fair prospect for a yield. But he
could give us no definite idea of the past crop.

We here regaled with oranges and bananas of the finest quality, and
coffee was also handed at the house.


                                             SUNDAY, _October 22, 1865_.

During the morning I was requested to prescribe for a little son of
Senor Francisco, and as there was no medicine in the house suited to the
case, we rode to the town to learn if iodine, iodide of potash, and
syrup of sarsaparilla could be found at the apothecary shop.

All the articles fortunately were on hand, and the keeper of the shop
promised to have the medicine ready to-morrow morning. After calling
upon several parties in the villa, we were entertained with music on the
accordeon by a dark-skinned gentleman, while a parrot was paraded upon
the table and supposed to be marching in time to the music, of which,
however, I could not have a full appreciation. As will be perceived,
this was a Sunday exercise, and in the mean time our old friend, Senor
Joaquim, went out to attend mass.

After returning to São Lorenço, the camarada was sent to the villa for
our baggage, which had been left behind the day previous.

In the afternoon I was summoned by Mr. Bennaton to join a party who were
going out, and found they were preparing for a hunt. I was offered a
gun, and the gentlemen of the family were very much surprised at my
refusal to accept it, as they had previously understood that I was fond
of shooting. Though I declined the gun, the Sabbath was violated by
accompanying the huntsmen on horseback. Several shots were fired by
different members of the party, at a species of partridge nearly as
large as a chicken, but no game was secured, and a shower of rain
induced a precipitate return to the house. I told them it was a judgment
sent upon us for violating the Sabbath, and resolved not to be again
lead into such a departure from my sense of duty. Fortunately our
baggage had arrived and afforded us dry clothes.

Shortly after our return, there arrived two visitors from the villa, who
were also quite wet, and had to avail themselves of a supply of dry
clothes from our host and his son. One of these gentlemen was Senor Dom
Aguiar, Municipal Judge, and the other was Senor Lenente Coronal Antonio
Carlos de Arruda Botilho, who owns a large fazenda some thirty miles
distant, at which he resides.

Having friends and business relations with this place, this latter
gentleman is frequently in the villa of Araraquara, and is held in good
repute by those residing in the neighborhood. With these people a ride
of thirty miles is a small matter, as they frequently set out at or
before daylight, and make the distance upon a good mule before
breakfasting. From the lateness of the hour at which these gentlemen
came, I suppose they expected to remain for the night, and now since
they have changed their own clothes for others belonging to the family,
there is no alternative. The social relations among people in this
country who are on a basis of equality seems to be accompanied with
great freedom of intercourse, and liberty in their deportment about the
dwellings of each other, while nothing like rudeness, or want of proper
personal respect, has attracted my attention.

While it is my purpose to record as far as practicable every thing which
may illustrate the industrial resources of Brazil, it also appears to be
proper that I should give such incidents as may serve to give an idea of
the manners and customs of the people, and this must be done in some
cases by implicating myself in scenes that do not comport with my views
of propriety, as to-day.


                                             MONDAY, _October 23, 1865_.

A letter from the President of the province of São Paulo being received
by Mr. Bennaton, from which he inferred that General W. W. W. Wood, of
Mississippi, needed his assistance on the way to this point, he proposed
to return for the purpose of meeting him. I declined to accompany him,
and told him it would suit me better to remain in this vicinity, for the
purpose of examining such places as might be conveniently visited during
his absence.

My old friend, Colonel Joaquim Lorenço, invited me to sojourn at his
house, and kindly offered to aid me in looking around the country, or in
any other matter that might be desired.

He authorized Mr. Bennaton to say to me that there is a very comfortable
house upon an adjoining place to this, which he will cheerfully furnish
for the use of my family, and that he will also supply them with
provisions and all other necessaries for living, free of all cost, until
some more satisfactory arrangement can be made for them, and invites me
to bring them here should a purchase be made anywhere in this region.

I returned my most profound thanks for this generous offer, and felt
truly that “a friend in need is a friend indeed.” As yet, however, I am
unable to say whether circumstances will permit me to accept the
proposition, though it is evidently tendered in good faith, and with the
expectation that a location for my friends may be found in this
vicinity. I rode out with my host to see the house and grounds offered
for my family, and found every thing more inviting than most dwellings
in this country, with abundant supply of water.

Mr. Bennaton having left, I find myself thrown upon my own resources in
communicating with those around me, and though attended with much
embarrassment and difficulty, it will serve greatly to advance my
knowledge of the Portuguese language.

The apparent cheerfulness with which the old Colonel and other members
of the family render me assistance is a great relief in my awkward
efforts to use the few phrases I have learned. From time to time I have
been studying the Portuguese grammar, but have the misfortune to be
provided with a very badly-arranged and unsatisfactory edition that was
given me by my friend, the Rev. A. L. Blackford, at São Paulo. It is by
E. F. Granert, of Cleveland, Ohio, who resided for some years in Brazil,
but certainly has not acquired the art of making a grammar to facilitate
a knowledge of the language. I could have made considerable progress in
learning the vocabulary on my voyage across the water, but regarding the
pronunciation of prime consequence, in the first acquisition of words, I
purposely deferred committing words or phrases to memory, until I could
avail myself of the assistance of persons speaking the language, and
thus get a correct pronunciation.

I am still impressed with the importance of this course, as none of the
rules can enable the learner to get an accurate idea of the
peculiarities of the spoken tongue.

A little son of Senor Joas de Almida Leite Morais, another son-in-law of
my host, is at present suffering from an attack of cholera morbus at São
Lorenço, and is under my treatment. A prescription has been written out,
and sent to the apothecary at the villa, who filled it very
satisfactorily, and all promises well.


                                            TUESDAY, _October 24, 1865_.

My little patient is entirely relieved by the treatment instituted on
yesterday, and the entire household seem to be very much gratified at
the result of prescription. As there are no physicians in this district,
a few favorable cases would no doubt be a passport to the confidence of
all who require medical aid. But I can’t entertain the thought of
entering upon a country practice, however profitable it might prove. And
if I locate in this region, it will be with a view to engage in
agricultural operations. Should my friends from any cause abandon the
thought of coming to Brazil, then I may locate in some city, and enter
upon the practice of my profession.

I rode out with Colonel Joaquim to his field this morning, and got his
ideas of the indications of good soil from the appearance of the earth,
and the nature of the growth upon it. He places most confidence in the
presence of the Pon d’Alho when it is very large, as it then indicates
depth of soil, which nourishes the roots, and gives vigor to the tree.
His lands are chiefly of the terra rocha order, and he agrees with
others in considering this as best suited to coffee and sugar-cane, and
also to the cultivation of corn. He thinks, however, that the yield of
the cotton upon this rich land is not so favorable as upon a soil with
some sand intermixed, which agrees with the views of others on this
subject. His experience, however, in cultivating cotton, is limited to a
small supply for home consumption, as his fixtures for treating the
sugar render it better for him to continue in that business, and he
could not find sale for cotton nearer than Santos. He uses the plough to
prepare his land for planting the sugar-cane, and employs the tops of
the sound and vigorous cane from which to grow his crop.

This seems to be the plan universally adopted here, instead of planting
entire stalks, as is done in the lower parts of Georgia and Florida; and
of course proves an item of great economy in planting a large area of
ground in sugar-cane.

I observe, here, that rice is planted in upland, and without any regard
to securing a moist place. The yield is fair, and the quality of the
article very good, though not equal to Carolina rice. It is grown, to a
greater or less extent, upon most of the fazendas I have visited, but
simply for family consumption; while upon the coast, I am informed,
there are large rice-plantations, that produce it for the market
extensively.

In addition to other industrial enterprises, Senor Joaquim has a
stock-farm in connection with the residence shown to me yesterday, and
there has about twelve hundred head of cattle which are grown for the
market, as well as to supply the wants of his own family. He has in that
place a large tract of land, of which about ten thousand acres are in
woodland, and twenty thousand acres in campo, furnishing ample range for
his cattle. This has not been a matter of much concern with him, and the
profits are considered as small in comparison to his other business.
Yet, he thinks, with proper care, it might become valuable; and by
combining the rearing of mules with that of cattle, it would make a very
pretty department of industry for some of our Southerners who are fond
of stock.


                                          WEDNESDAY, _October 25, 1865_.

My old friend gave me to understand this morning, that we would start in
the afternoon to make a visit to one of his daughters, and thence
to-morrow to examine some lands which had already been seen
superficially in company with Dom Barros.

I had been guessing his meaning in most of the communications made to
me, from the few words I could understand, but on this occasion there
was no point caught in his first presentation of the matter, and upon
asking him to repeat what he said, I managed to infer that it pertained
to this trip, which had been contemplated. My very general reply, “Eston
as suas ordeus,” (I am at your orders,) indicated my readiness to go
whenever it suited him, and on asking him what time we should start, he
indicated 2 o’clock P. M.

Accordingly his wife and three daughters joined us on horseback, and we
rode eight miles to the house of his son-in-law, Senor Joaquim de
Sampaio Peixoto. Here I met a cordial reception, and found plenty of
oranges, with good cheer, and also comfortable quarters. I observed at
this house a specimen of cattle with shorter and smaller horns than the
stock usually seen in the country, and learned they were imported. The
native cows do not make good milkers, being very large and coarse, and
in common with the males having most enormous horns. They make good
beef, and furnish large hides, but are not suited for the domestic
purposes of a family. It is stated, indeed, that these immense oxen are
not so serviceable as those of the smaller size which are found in some
parts of the country.

The ladies mounted and dismounted their horses without assistance at
starting and arriving.


                                           THURSDAY, _October 26, 1865_.

All our party, accompanied by Senor Peixoto, set out immediately after
breakfast upon horseback. While we stopped a few minutes to examine a
new mill-dam on the way, we saw a small deer (viado) swimming down the
stream, to make its escape from the dogs which had been pursuing it
above.

Instead of taking to the bank, when it reached the dam, it plunged over
the fall, and made its way down by running in the current, which was no
longer deep enough to require it to swim. The dread of the pursuer kept
it from going upon land, where it might be scented and followed.

The old Colonel went with the ladies directly to the residence of Dom
Barros, while Senor Peixoto very kindly acted as guide for me in
examining the lands. He took me through the most obscure paths, and to
all desired parts of the territory included in the tracts of Lacerda,
Rodrigues, and Roberto, lying near the Rio Jacaré.

My impressions of the quality of these lands were not materially changed
by the inspection, but malarial indications were presented at several
points on the Lacerda tract, apart from the fixed fact of the
unwholesome atmosphere of the Jacaré river. The quantity of water suited
for drinking purposes was found less than previously anticipated, and
there is no stream upon either of the places suited for any kind of
machinery. The prospect for a location upon these lands is therefore
decidedly unfavorable, though the soil would yield good crops.

After dining with Dom Barros, our party rode back to São Lorenço, a
distance of sixteen miles, without any apparent inconvenience to the
ladies. The physical stamina of these women is equal to any thing.


                                             FRIDAY, _October 27, 1865_.

Having eaten a great variety of meats and fruits, with much exposure to
the hot sun, I found myself suffering this morning with some derangement
of the bowels, and asked my old friend if he had any brandy. As he had
none, he gave me some port wine, but this did not relieve me; and he
then gave me a mixture of aqua-ardente (rum) and polvilho (starch of the
mandioca) with a little water and sugar. It was very strong with the rum
and I took but one-half of the quantity provided. This acted favorably,
and is doubtless well adapted to relieve the relaxation of the
intestines resulting from improper diet in this climate.

The amount and quality of my food was changed for this day to suit my
condition; and it seemed to be a source of much concern to the family
that I did not partake of the many good things prepared for me. Indeed,
each of the three meals was like a dinner in the variety of the
articles, and it required the greatest circumspection to keep from
eating too much.

I rode out to the fields again with the old Colonel, and thus had a
little more latitude for practising my vocabulary of Portuguese; and
after returning my time was devoted industriously to improving my
facility in the use of the language. I read aloud some articles in the
newspaper which had already been learned with the use of the dictionary,
and some difficulties of construction were explained by the Colonel and
his son-in-law. I have also resorted to reading in the Portuguese
Testament, with the English at hand, so as to assist me in a proper
translation, but this does not seem to improve me so much as the reading
of the articles in the newspapers with my dictionary. The effort to
understand the idiom is a good exercise.


                                           SATURDAY, _October 28, 1865_.

Although I retired late last night, my sleep was disturbed by the
deranged state of my system, and farther perhaps by the presence of a
vagalume which had been secured under a glass in the room.

This singular lightning-bug is of the size of an ordinary beetle, and
has two luminous spots of considerable brilliancy, corresponding to the
position of the eyes. It imparts sufficient light to read when held near
the printed page; and the time by a watch is told with great facility
when it is held near the face.

The brother of Senor Joaquim Lorenço, Senor Francisco Correa de
Arruda,[19] spent the night with us, and impressed me very favorably as
a man of substantial worth and good sense.

After breakfast I joined the old Colonel in a ride of six miles to the
farm of Senor Joaquim Correa da Assumpsão, where the best cotton was
seen growing that has been encountered in my tour. It had borne a crop
last season amounting to 2453 pounds in the seed per acre, with a
prospect of an increased yield this year after cutting off the stalks.
The limbs have already sprouted out to some distance, and are spreading
in such form as to make a good stalk; and the squares, blooms, and
forming bolls indicate a most excellent result. This land has not been
ploughed at any time, and would certainly be improved by cultivation
with the plough.

While we were at the house of Senor Assumpsão, a messenger came to
notify the old Colonel of the arrival of General Wood and party at the
villa of Araraquara. We rode into the villa and found them in charge of
some of the citizens. All took breakfast with Dom Andre Dias da Aguinar,
and as it was nearly 12 o’clock, they evidently relished his abundant
supplies after a ride of sixteen miles.

Upon asking General Wood to give me a memoranda of the names of those
constituting his party, the following list was written and handed to me:

General William Wallace W. Wood, lawyer and editor, of Mississippi,
representing seven States.

Dr. James H. Warne, surgeon and physician, from Tennessee.

Robert L. Brown, planter, Alabama.

_Aids._—W. C. Kernan, of Florida, architect and builder; Dr. J. P.
Wesson, Tennessee, dentist and machinist.

_Government Aids._—Major Ernest Street, civil engineer, São Paulo; Henry
Snell, interpreter, Campinas.

Three servants and two mule-tenders; four pack-mules.

Mr. Bennaton failed to meet the General’s party on the road, but
returned and joined them at the villa this morning.

The entire cavalcade, accompanied by a number of gentlemen from the
villa, repaired to São Lorenço, with the proprietor, and enjoyed a most
bountiful and well prepared dinner at 4 o’clock P. M.

I had been introduced to General Wood in New Orleans early in the month
of July, and understood from him then that he was delegated to come to
Brazil as the representative of five hundred families in Mississippi,
but as he was delayed in starting, it seemed to me best that my
movements should not be retarded for the sake of his company, and I left
the city for New York on the 12th of the month. As I sailed prior to his
arrival, there was no further communication between us until our meeting
here, and it is now found that his commission has been extended so as to
include seven States.

One of his party, Mr. Kernan, brought a letter of introduction to me
from Dr. R. P. Daniel, of Florida, in which he remarks: “I was myself,
in connection with another gentleman from Florida, on my way to Brazil
to locate a colony; circumstances have delayed us so much beyond the
time we had proposed that, considering the difference in seasons and
other matters, we have concluded to return home and wait until next
spring before going on. I regret this delay very much; meantime, will
you not let me hear from you at your convenience?”

In the multiplicity of my engagements, it may not be in my power to make
such a communication to Dr. Daniel as would be desirable, and the
publication of this record will give him and others who have desired
information most of the facts in my possession connected with this
country.


                                             SUNDAY, _October 29, 1865_.

The large number of guests were all comfortably provided with bedding at
São Lorenço, and rose this morning refreshed, and responded promptly to
the call for breakfast, doing ample justice to the supplies.

It was intimated to me that Senor Francisco desired me to examine and
prescribe for his wife, a daughter of our host; and Mr. Bennaton rode
over with us and interpreted my questions and her answers, so that a
full history of the case was received. It was a stomatitis of two months
standing; and finding a Portuguese medical formulary at São Lorenço I
was enabled to make out a regular recipe, which was sent to the druggist
in the villa.

Shortly after our return a delegation arrived, representing the villa
and county of Araraquara, who presented addresses in Portuguese to
General Wood and myself. Our replies were, of course, written in
English, but were rendered into Portuguese by Mr. Bennaton, and
presented to the representatives, who were in attendance.

A translation of the address to me, and my answer, will be given here,
in fulfilment of the request contained in their communication:


“DOCTOR GASTON:—It is not only the commission under which you are
acting, and by the fulfilment of which Brazil, developing her immense
resources, hopes to attain in a short time to that degree of importance
which providence has designed, that causes the municipal common council
of this village, interpreting faithfully the sentiments of their
citizens, to come by the delegation which you have before you, and
express the desire that you may find what you seek; and thus, that your
worthy fellow-citizens—our brothers of the American Union—may adopt our
country for their country. It is likewise the sentiment of sympathy,
doctor, which your manners and education have induced on the part of all
who have had intercourse with you.

“Remain then, doctor, amongst us, as also your friends, that you may
succeed in obtaining lands, which will be suitable for your energetic
farmers and mechanics; and rest assured that we will receive you as
brothers receive brothers.

“In this form we ask you to make known to them the sentiments which
animate us.

                                    (Signed) “MANOEL FRANCISCO OLIVEIRO,
                                    “FRANCISCO CORREA DE ARRUDA,
                                    “JOSÉ ARANHA DA AMARAL.

                                    “ARARAQUARA, _October 29, 1865_.”


                                       “SÃO LORENÇO, _October 29, 1865_.

“GENTLEMEN:—Your address received to-day causes the most grateful
emotions, which are enhanced by my separation from those included in
your expressions of sympathy: and for them allow me to thank you
cordially.

“The regard manifested for myself in this communication, and the
personal kindness of your people toward me, cheers my heart, and I feel
that I am surrounded by true friends in Araraquara.

“My visit to this country inaugurates a new era, which I trust may
conduce to the mutual welfare and enjoyment of our people in after
years, and promote likewise the best interests of Brazil.

“Should a suitable location be found for myself and my friends it will
be sincerely gratifying to make our home amongst you. I am, very
respectfully,

                               “Your obedient servant,
                               “J. MCF. GASTON.

                               “To Messrs. MANOEL FRANCISCO DE OLIVEIRO,
                               FRANCISCO CORREA DE ARRUDA,
                               JOSÉ ARANHA DA AMARAL.”


It will be perceived that this ceremony was on Sunday, and though public
business is generally suspended on the Sabbath as a holiday, there is
nothing which these people may not do on Sunday so far as any religious
scruples are concerned. That we must do in Rome as Rome does, is a bad
maxim in morals or in politics; and yet there are certain relations to
others in life, and to the circumstances by which we are surrounded,
that are next to an impossibility to control. These considerations come
to mind constantly here, and it is proper that they should enter into
the calculations of our people who may think of removing to this
country, as it will be found very difficult to act in such a way as to
overcome the influences at work on all sides to subvert our views of
duty as to the Sabbath. When a number of like faith and practice are
associated together in one community, they may establish their own
customs and observances; and the importance of locating together will
not subserve this end only, but many other useful objects for our future
welfare.


                                             MONDAY, _October 30, 1865_.

General Wood and myself, with our party, accompanied by Colonel Joaquim
Lorenço and his son-in-law, Senor Francisco, left São Lorenço this
morning shortly after five o’clock A. M. Our object being the
exploration of the fazendas of Lagrada, Cambuy and Monte Allegre, it was
expected that we would be out several days, and provisions were
accordingly made by the old Colonel for all our prospective wants during
the tour.

We rode first through a portion of the tract of land known as Lagrada,
containing thirty thousand acres of land, and belonging to our host,
which he proposed to sell if it is desired. It consists of campo land in
two-thirds of its extent, and the remaining third of forest land. Our
route this morning was through the campo land, in which the soil was
red, and having quite a variety of small trees and shrubs. Some of those
bore fruits, while others were of a medicinal character. Among the
latter were found the trees from which are procured quinine, manna and
India rubber, with the plants of the jalap, columbo, ipecac, and several
indigenous remedies for syphilitic diseases and the bites of venomous
serpents. Indeed these plains contain quite a variety of fruits and
medicinal agents, and it is evident that collections of the latter,
having much value, might be made by one acquainted with their properties
and general aspects.

We proceeded through a portion of the lands of Cambuy, which is said to
contain twelve square leagues of territory, which makes one hundred and
twenty-two thousand eight hundred and eighty acres of land. The
proportion of campo is supposed to be two-thirds to one-third of
woodland. Our route lay through a portion of the woodland, which is of
the terra rocha order, and about two miles across, to the river Jacaré.
Here we found a bridge had been undertaken, but was not completed, nor
did the work seem to be progressing.

To the west of this, some half a mile, there empties the Rio da
Fazendinha, which conveys sufficient water for motive power, and has a
fall of great extent, less than a mile from its mouth. The Rio da
Montada and the Rio João Velho are smaller streams, which empty into the
Jacaré farther westward.

There is a serra running up and down the Jacaré, and nearly parallel
with the general course of the stream, having the crest about two miles
distant and sloping gradually on each side; upon that slope next the
river chill and fever is said to be generated, while near the crest and
upon the opposite slope it is stated to be exempt from all disease.

The lands upon this serra are said to be of the best quality, and if
they correspond throughout to the soil seen near the road, there is
every reason to anticipate a good result from their cultivation. Until
some proper and reliable measurement is made of this fazenda, no idea
can be formed of the extent of this body of woodland, yet it is
certainly the most valuable territory of the entire tract. If it be two
leagues long, and one league wide, as some estimate it to be, it would
form a very valuable acquisition for agricultural operations.

In returning from the Jacaré we entered the woods and proceeded to the
bank of the Rebeira Fazendinha, where we breakfasted upon passorca and
oranges in true traveller’s style. As the components were simple, and
yet readily intermixed so as to give them a peculiar fitness for
travelling, the process should be understood. Boiled beef is cut up into
mincemeat, and then mixed with the farina made of corn so intimately in
a mortar that it becomes a coarse powder, and is called passorca. This,
then, is eaten with a spoon, and, when combined with an orange, as in
our repast, it is really most excellent. In the absence of oranges or a
bottle of claret it is well to have water to drink while it is eaten.

In the mean time Senor Francisco shot a macucu and her young bird, which
were regarded as a great acquisition to assist in making out our
breakfast next morning. This bird of the forest is something larger than
a chicken, and is pronounced one of the best for the table; but, in the
present case, with young birds of the size of a partridge, the hen is
not in the best eating order. A small cobra was also killed.

Our ride, after leaving these woods, was principally through campo
lands, in some of which, large, high grass was seen, but, for the most
part, the growth of grass was small and scattering. In one place I
observed small cane had been growing and was burned off, so that a new
crop was sprouting up over the ground. This would doubtless be good
grazing while it is tender.

We saw several considerable droves of cattle that were in fair
condition, and the calves generally presented a good appearance.

The woodland which was passed in the midst of the campo lands was very
well timbered, and looked as if it might have strength of soil adapted
to the production of cotton. The sand, however, predominated largely in
most of it that was seen; and Senor Joaquim Lorenço told us this was a
fair type of these lands located in other parts of the territory. With
this information, it was not thought advisable to make a tour of fifteen
or twenty miles to see a duplicate of that which we examined; and it was
concluded that we would repair to the situ on the place for the night.
We passed a fine stream of water some mile of two from the houses, and
found a small water-course at the place, adapted to work a monjolo, and
perhaps it would serve for a small grist-mill.

Upon arriving at the situ, we found that our camarada and cook had every
thing in progress for dinner, and we were soon served with a good, warm,
substantial repast, which seemed to be appreciated by all, after the
long and tiresome day’s ride, through campos, in the sun.

After dining, Colonel Joaquim Lorenço, at our request, sketched upon the
ground the outline of this extensive collection of lands, and its
relations to other adjoining places, giving a rough map of all the
tracts of land convenient to the villa of Araraquara which it was
supposed would be sold. Upon this, Mr. Street based a plan and sketched
the outlines for a map, which he proposed to fill out in examining the
surrounding country, and it is likely to be very useful.


                                            TUESDAY, _October 31, 1865_.

Getting an extra early breakfast, we set out this morning, and rode
through a wide extent of rather indifferent land, diversified by hill
and dale, as well as broad-extended plains. There were some portions of
woodland, having a light soil, in which the sandy element prevailed to
an extent that must render it of small value. But there were other
portions of woodland, with a reddish-colored soil, which were evidently
of a better quality. Yet none had the dark purple hue which
characterizes the terra rocha soil, and which is regarded the best
quality of land in this country.

In passing through the fazenda of Monte Allegre, immense undulating
plains of red soil were traversed; and different views were entertained
as to the practicability of cultivating these lands successfully with
the plough. There is in many places almost no vegetation, and the dry,
hard, red earth looks as if it scarcely had the requisite elements for
the germination and sustentation of grass or plants of any kind. This
may depend in part upon the long-protracted drought which has existed in
all this region of country; yet it is an inexplicable circumstance that
no planter attempts to raise a crop upon any portion of these campos,
and their cultivation would certainly be attended with less labor than
clearing up matto lands. An experiment with the plough should, however,
be made, with a view to test their productiveness.

When we reached the situ of Senor José Pinto, in charge of this fazenda,
every thing was found ready for our comfort, as he had been notified of
our coming by Senor Joaquim Lorenço. Being in advance, with some others
who did not speak Portuguese, it devolved upon me to use my small stock
in communicating with the proprietor, and I am encouraged to find that
my words are understood, while I comprehend much that is said by others
in this tongue.

Dinner was served in accordance with the most approved style of the
country, the courses being of great variety, and the plates being
frequently changed. We were agreeably surprised with the excellent taste
displayed in connection with the table, and it was no less a matter of
admiration to find beds arranged for all our large party with the
greatest elegance. The pillow-cases were decorated with fine lace, and
some of the spreads were beautifully embroidered. It is an odd fancy
with many families to have towels of very fine material trimmed with
very broad lace, and this was exhibited here in the greatest profusion
upon the towels for our use.

There is a water-course on each side of the houses, which, uniting
below, form a considerable stream. This large creek has a fall upon it,
which affords a very favorable site for machinery, and indeed each of
the smaller streams is also adapted to supply good water-power, while
one of them already has a cotton-gin and grist-mill in operation, but
both on a small scale.

In an enclosure near the mill-house there are two large trees, called
Ximbo, which we were told had been planted there some years ago; and
this would seem to indicate that the land will grow other trees better
than those usually seen in campos. These trees present a luxuriant,
thriving aspect, and afford a very fine shade for stock, while they
would be highly decorative and useful in the immediate vicinity of the
dwelling. It is remarked, however, that shade trees are seldom seen here
about a house, and the climate being very warm during most of the year,
the benefit of the trees ought to be apparent to all.

Orange trees are growing in the garden attached to this house, and
though not bearing at present, they are well developed and will
doubtless yield abundantly in proper season. The oranges in all this
region are said to be very fine, and in some places the trees are found
still with some fruit, which is of the very best quality. It has been a
matter of consideration with me, whether the growing of the orange for
the purpose of making wine and brandy might not become profitable. That
a good article of each can be produced has already been satisfactorily
proved, and there is a modification of the wine, known by the name of
Coracão, which is very much prized. This name implies that it is adapted
to cheer the heart, and it is considered a great delicacy. I have tasted
a specimen of the ordinary wine of the orange, and thought it
corresponded very much to the Sherry wine, which is certainly one of the
best wines that is imported to the United States.

A dog-kennel with seventeen deer-hounds was seen here, and these animals
have sharp ears like the wolf, with greater activity and fleetness than
our hounds.


                                          WEDNESDAY, _November 1, 1865_.

At five o’clock this morning three of the party and myself joined the
proprietor in making a tour of observation in the plantation and
neighboring woodlands of Monte Allegre. The soil was not of a superior
quality, yet it would doubtless produce moderately well. Cotton had been
planted last year, and seemed to have made an average stalk, while that
more recently planted was growing quite as well as the want of
cultivation would warrant. The large proportion of unproductive land
upon this fazenda, and the medium quality of most of the woodland, do
not present encouraging features for a settlement upon it. Yet the fine
location, and the water facilities, have evidently inspired General Wood
with the idea that it would afford a favorable location for a city of
newcomers. It is thought, moreover, that in the event of the extension
of a railroad to this region, it will pass in the immediate vicinity of
this place. That the location is healthy is shown by the residence of a
large family and quite a gang of negroes for many years at this site,
with very slight sickness of any kind. But there are wanting, in my
view, the most essential requisites for building a city, or for
establishing a large number of our people, in the deficient basis for
agricultural pursuits and the absence of means of transportation, while
there is a very scanty supply of timber at any point convenient for use.
We need many things in commencing a settlement for which we must depend
upon the resources of the surrounding country, or upon transportation
from other parts; and in case these supplies are not likely to be found
near at hand, the means of ready communication with some furnishing
point becomes essential.

We left Monte Allegre about 9 o’clock A. M., and came out through a
different portion of the territory from that previously seen, but found
no improvement in the nature of the soil. At one point we were informed
that a field of coffee (cafézar) was near the road, but being of recent
planting, it would have afforded very little idea of the fitness of the
soil to its growth, and hence we did not visit it. The woodlands passed
through to-day belonged to that class known as terra branca, having a
large proportion of sand mixed with the soil, and might perhaps be
appropriate for the cultivation of cotton for a few years.

After leaving the lands of Monte Allegre, I proceeded with Senor Joaquim
Lorenço, and Mr. Snell as interpreter, to examine some of the woodland
belonging to the tract known as Lageado. The growth upon it is of good
size, and much of it very suitable for building purposes. There is a
stream of water suited for domestic purposes running lengthwise
throughout the body of woods, and there is a large water-course at one
extremity, which is available for machinery. This land is of a gray
aspect, having a considerable proportion of sand; yet Senor Joaquim
thinks it will grow every thing to advantage excepting coffee and
sugar-cane. He tells me also that there is a portion of red land (terra
vermilho) which would grow those articles in common with others.


                                           THURSDAY, _November 2, 1865_.

Accompanied by Senor Joaquim Lorenço, we moved at daylight from his
fazenda en route for Brotas and Jahu, and without any incident of
special moment, we stopped about noon at the fazenda of Senor Jacinto
Antonio Fagandes, (deceased.) We were supplied with water, and also with
milk and water mixed, which spoiled both these articles, and brought up
associations that ought not to arise in connection with the hospitality
of our friends. We were furnished with coffee also after waiting until
our patience was exhausted, but it was thankfully received and enjoyed.

Here we saw the skin of an ant-eater, (Tamandoa Bandoera,) which is of a
gray color, with the hair upon the back very harsh and long, and the
tail of immense size, spreading out like a fan at the sides. This animal
has powerful arms and front paws, with which it tears up the earth in
search of the nests of the ant; and it is said to be very ferocious when
encountered by other animals. An instance has been communicated, in
which an ant-eater and a tiger became engaged, with the result of
killing the former, yet the claws had been so imbedded in the flesh of
the tiger that it remained clinging to it, until the sickening and
emaciation of the tiger made it an easy prey to the hunter, when the
dried body of the ant-eater was found still attached by its claws to the
body of the tiger.

This is given as reported to me by a person who claimed to have a
personal knowledge of the fact, and illustrates the tenacious grasp of
this animal.

After leaving the dwelling, and its incumbent of milk and water memory,
we passed through a portion of the land of this fazenda, which contains
about eighteen thousand acres, and is now for sale. There is a branch or
small creek with very clear water, which was crossed after entering one
of the fields. The soil here was evidently well suited to the growth of
corn, as there were large heaps lying in the husk on each side of the
road, preparatory to being hauled and put into the crib or paijol. There
were also a number of young coffee trees growing in this field, but we
had no information as to their age, and it is sufficient to remark that
they looked vigorous and healthy, with a good prospect for the future.

The party to whose estate this place belongs owned three large fazendas;
and there is one located near Lemeira, which is said to be a valuable
coffee plantation, giving a large annual yield.

The place passed this morning is called Carrentes, and is about two
miles from the situ of Major Gaveão.

After leaving these lands, we passed through a most dreary sand-bed of
nearly two leagues in extent, and crossing the Jacaré river at a
water-fall, (Cachoeira,) we stopped for the night at the residence of
Senor José Rodrigues Simães.

This is a very superior site for machinery, and yet the main stream is
not made available, while a small stream entering into it is turned into
a race through a large hollow log, and moves quite a large sugar-mill
and a monjolo.

A trough was measured here with dimensions of forty by forty-five
inches. We were supplied with oranges and limes in great abundance and
of the finest quality. In the course of the evening, I had stepped into
the back part of the house to ask a servant to bring me a basin of
water; and shortly afterwards the proprietor of the house, in company
with my old friend, Senor Joaquim, came to me with a candle in his hand
and said something about sickness, which I supposed referred to myself.
I told him in Portuguese, of course, as neither of them understood any
thing else, that nothing ailed me, and that the water asked for was
simply to wash my hands and face.

They looked at each other, and wearing quite an embarrassed aspect,
repeated the remark as to the sickness, which, with my imperfect
knowledge of the language, was not properly understood, but was
construed to mean, that I had better go to a room and lie down. Again I
remonstrated, when the old Colonel gave me to understand that it was not
on my account, but for the relief of another, that they desired me to go
to the room. This placed the matter upon quite a different basis, and I
proceeded to examine a man who had been seriously wounded on the head by
the blow of a cudgel, while engaged in an affray. He was then laboring
under oppression of the brain to some extent, and learning that his
bowels were torpid, I administered a dose of calomel, with directions to
follow it with oil, and to keep cloths wet with cold water constantly to
his head, which should be placed near a window.

I went out of the room, hoping but little for any benefit from the
treatment, and yet he was not in a state to bear blood-letting. Our
interpreter being absent from the house caused the awkward interview as
reported.


                                             FRIDAY, _November 3, 1865_.

We were all roused before daylight, to make ready for the road, and upon
examining my patient I was gratified to find that his medicine had been
productive of good results, with encouragement to hope for recovery.

Getting a cup of coffee before starting, we took breakfast at the house
of Senor José Venancio Carneiro, and reached Brotas at twelve o’clock.
We found the population alive to the importance of the visit, and an
address of welcome was made to General W. W. W. Wood by Dom Francisco
Ernesto Malheiros, to which the General responded. Mr. Bennaton repeated
the remarks of the former at the close of his address, making &c., &c.,
&c., cover a large gap in memory. But he interpreted the words of the
General as they were delivered, giving each paragraph separately, as a
pause was made for that purpose. This part of the performance was
executed to the entire satisfaction of all concerned.

I delivered a letter to the above-named gentleman, and also one to Senor
Francisco de Campos of the place, each of whom tendered any assistance
that might be useful to me or my friends.

It was gratifying to find here among those who rode out to meet us my
friend Rev. A. L. Blackford; and upon leaving, he rode out several miles
with me, as an act of personal kindness and courtesy, which was duly
appreciated.

We dined in the villa of Brotas, at a house owned by the same gentleman
at whose residence we breakfasted, but he was not present on either
occasion, being at some distance on business in the country. Being
notified by Senor Joaquim, the family arranged every thing.

When our party were in readiness to start out of town in the afternoon,
there was quite a large concourse of gentlemen on horseback presented
themselves to accompany us on our way; and the street was thronged on
the side-walks and in the windows with women and others, who seemed to
look upon our movement as something remarkable for this quiet place.

General Wood had received an invitation before reaching the town,
through a special messenger, to proceed to the house of Senor Antonio
Joaquim Camargo and spend the night. It was also stated that several
letters had been received by this gentleman from persons in São Paulo,
suggesting that he should entertain this party; and hence the General
set aside a previous arrangement of the old Colonel, that we would go to
the house of his son-in-law, and went with Senor Camargo, to enjoy his
hospitality.

Upon the special invitation of my old friend, I accompanied him to the
house of his son-in-law, Senor Domingos José Carneiro, and found that
all requisite preparations had been made for entertaining the entire
company. Dinner had been in progress, and all the bedding was in
readiness to make all comfortable for the night.

This residence is upon the elevated plateau of the serra, and we had a
very steep ascent to make in reaching the crest, but once gained, the
view of the country for miles up and down the valley, or rather the
lower strata of land, was really magnificent. The soil here is
excellent, and all the staples are growing well. Coffee seems to
flourish particularly well, though not in terra rocha.


                                           SATURDAY, _November 4, 1865_.

My old friend, the Colonel, rose at half-past three o’clock this
morning, and directed our horses to be fed and coffee to be prepared for
us, preliminary to early starting.

I was forcibly reminded last night of the difference between the lady of
the house and our ladies, by her remaining in the room while we were
preparing to retire to bed. Though tired and sleepy, I waited some time
after taking off my coat and vest, before she took the hint to leave,
and after I got in bed, she came back to talk to her father, who then
had off his wearing apparel, and was sitting on the side of the bed.
This is mentioned simply to illustrate the want of sensitiveness on the
part of women in the ordinary respectable class of society in this
country.

Senor Joaquim Lorenço and I left about half-past four o’clock, with a
negro to put us on the right road after getting out of the plantation.
Upon reaching the fazenda of Senor Camargo, we learned that the General
and his party had left some half hour previous. The road travelled by
them was marked by the tracks of their animals, and, besides, a green
bough of a tree had been placed in the roads that were not to be taken,
and we consequently followed them without difficulty. Most persons place
a bough on the road to be taken; but, knowing that Mr. Bennaton pursued
the other course, I understood this thing, which was likely to puzzle
the old Colonel, when he perceived the bush on one road and the tracks
leading another route.

Coming up with the pack-train, we found that a camarada was ascending a
tree upon which grew a large crop of very fine jaboticabas, and availed
ourselves of as many as we could eat. We took, moreover, quite a supply
of this delicious fruit in a handkerchief, thinking it would be very
acceptable to our friends ahead; but it so turned out that I carried the
rather weighty package eight miles before overtaking the party. They had
halted at about eleven o’clock A. M., for breakfast, at the fazenda of
Senor Joaquim Oliveiro Mattozenia; but, as there was no notice of their
coming, it was likely to be some time before any thing to eat could be
in readiness. It was, therefore, most acceptable to all, that the
Colonel had brought an assortment of substantials, with the expectation
of eating on the roadside; and they promptly availed themselves of the
chickens, pork, rice, farina, &c., which was spread out before them.

Notwithstanding the flourish-of-trumpets with which Senor Antonio
Joaquim Camargo had announced his readiness to accommodate General Wood
and party, they found quite a deficiency of the comforts which had been
met elsewhere; and, going to bed on a very light repast, they were now
as hungry as half-starved wolves. In a short time after this cold lunch
was concluded, it was announced that a hot breakfast was ready in the
dining-room, and we found the table laden with good things, of which
none could partake very largely after the previous supply; yet all went
through the form of eating, so as not to give offence to the lady of the
house, who, in the absence of her husband, had manifested so much
cheerfulness in preparing this breakfast. Senor Camargo had accompanied
the party thus far, but declined to partake of the lunch, and must have
felt chagrined to note the greater providence exhibited in this matter
than had been observed by him in starting them out without breakfast.

There had been a considerable hubbub among our party the previous day,
in reference to departing from the prearranged plan of Senor Joaquim
Lorenço, that all should go to the house of his son-in-law, Senor
Domingos; and in going to the fazenda of Senor Antonio Joaquim Camargo
the highest expectations were indulged as to the immense preparations
that had been made for a grand reception and sumptuous entertainment.
When it turned out so differently from what was anticipated, all vowed
that, henceforth, the party would stick to the old Colonel, and abide by
whatever he might plan for them in future movements.

Our course to-day lay through fair lands for the greater portion of the
route, and the place at which we stopped yields cane of the finest
quality, having seen four huge oxcart loads moving from the fields to
the sugar-house. This establishment has a large overshot water-wheel,
and three iron cylinders for the expressing of the juice of the cane.
The appliances for treating the sugar were few in number, and not
apparently well adapted to the object; yet the specimen of sugar at
breakfast was very fine, and was of domestic manufacture.

As stated above, the proprietor, Senor Joaquim Oliveiro Mattozenia, was
not at home; but we met him on the way, after leaving his house, and he
returned with us to the Freguezia de Jahu. He took us there to a house
in which his business is done, and sent out for ale to supply the whole
thirsty multitude, while coffee was prepared for those of us who
preferred to take it. He then went with us to the fazenda of Dom José
Correa Leite de Moraes, about two miles from the village, where we were
expected by prior arrangement.

Our host is a practising physician and has his drugs in the reception
room, upon shelves occupying each side of an angle, and making evidently
a good assortment of medicines, adapted to almost every use in the
treatment of diseases. Although the labels were mostly in Portuguese, I
readily understood them from the similarity to the technicals in Latin.
Since finding the embarrassment of prescribing for those who do not
understand a Latin formula, it has impressed me forcibly that this
technical language that is recognized by most nations ought to be
adopted by all, so as to simplify the filling of prescriptions by
physicians of different countries wherever their services may be in
requisition over the whole world.

The soil in this immediate vicinity is a very dark purple or brown
color, and is generally called here black land, (terra preta or terra
masape.) It is very rich in those elements requisite for production, and
yields all kinds of crops with but little labor. The consistence is such
that, when wet, it adheres with great tenacity to the shoes, and hence
the term “masape.” It corresponds in many respects to the rich bottom
lands lying upon the Mississippi river, and is not inferior to the best
soil of that region for sugar-cane, cotton, or corn. As yet the culture
of coffee has not been introduced for a length of time to test its
qualities for that crop, but it is confidently expected to yield well.

In some places there are numerous small fragments of clear rock crystal
mixed up with this dark soil, which shine brightly by the contrast, and
cause one to think there may be diamonds in the same region. I believe,
however, that jewels and minerals of much value are confined to sterile
lands.

This being the thirteenth anniversary of my marriage-day, it is recalled
with many reflections as to the present wide separation from her who is
united with me in the holy bonds of matrimony. The day and hour and
attendant circumstances of our union have all been vividly brought to
mind; and the many scenes of enjoyment, with some of sadness, which have
marked our course in life, have caused emotions within my breast which
those around knew nothing of, and which were not in unison with the stir
and excitement of the past day.

We commenced this series of thirteen years in the full enjoyment of
mutual affection, yet we did not and could not know each other’s heart
and devotion as we have learned them by many repeated acts of
self-sacrifice on the part of each for the other. No one, without the
experience of that love which exists alone between husband and wife, can
realize how entirely self may be absorbed in the devotion of the soul to
the welfare and enjoyment of one another. If there was a joy or a sweet
allowed me in this life which could not be shared by my wife, it would
detract from the gratification I would have from it; and I know too well
that every happiness which can be extended to me by my true-hearted and
loving wife affords an increase of happiness to her. We have shared many
trials together, and have become the parents of seven children; one of
whom left us for a place among the angels of heaven, at the early age of
eight months, while four interesting daughters and two sons of promising
parts remain to cheer us still.

How pleasant and precious is the thought of again returning to enjoy the
associations of my beloved wife and my darling children. There is no
sentiment of the human heart that is more elevating and refining in its
tendency than the love which a husband feels for his wife, and the
affection he has welling up in his breast for his children.

                     “In its silence and beauty,
                       Its passion and power;
                     Love breathed o’er the land
                       Like the soul of a flower.”

In the heart of him who has a sincere regard for his family, love is
truly as delicate and sensitive as the aroma of the sweetest flower. It
is the most tender and devoted consecration of the soul to the interests
and enjoyments of those cherished objects. It is the confiding sincerity
and purity of faith which the affectionate husband and father realizes
for those that are bound to him by the most holy and gentle ties of
mutual love. It is not a hope, but a full and complete enjoyment of
reciprocal attachment. The faith and trust are without a shadow of
misgiving as to the return they will meet, and the soul rests in
blissful consciousness of the love of wife and children.

The light beaming forth in the full glare of a noon-day sun may fail to
convince me of the warmth of that brilliant orb; but the glow of delight
which brightens the eye and lights up the features of my wife and my
children when we meet, cannot, must not, and will not, leave the shadow
of a doubt as to their affection for me. We live in the sweet
realization of each other’s love, and it is accompanied by the most
unselfish desire to promote the comfort and enjoyment of each other.

If I seek the good things of this life, it is that my family may share
them with me. If I seek exemption from the cares and vexations of the
world, it is to shield them from annoyance. If I seek preferment among
my fellowmen, it is with the anxious thought that they may thus be
brought into more desirable and honorable associations. If I seek social
enjoyment, the most exquisite gratification is found in the interchange
of cordial sentiments with my own loved ones at home. All in all, it is
with the anticipation of such happiness in future days that I now seek a
place of refuge from the troubles of my native land.

May God in his goodness and infinite mercy protect and sustain my wife
and my children, while I am endeavoring to secure a home for them here,
is the constant prayer of my heart.

I am now separated from all that is held dear in the associations of
life; and no step has ever been taken heretofore which caused me so much
anxiety and apprehension for the welfare of my family as leaving them in
the midst of troubles and irregularities in society, such as the world
has never witnessed before. But having taken all the preliminary steps
which human forecast could suggest for the comfort of those near and
dear to me, and with the attention of a kind friend, who would look
after them and their interests with the care of a brother, I trust in
the providence of a merciful God, that they may be preserved from all
harm, and that we may be soon returned to each other in health, peace,
and happiness.


                                             SUNDAY, _November 5, 1865_.

This being the Sabbath, I announced my intention to make it a day of
rest, and the old Colonel said he would remain with me, while the others
purposed to take a ride of fourteen miles to the Tieté river. A huge bag
of provisions was prepared for the expedition by our host, and a guide
was expected to meet them at the town of Jahu. But notwithstanding all
these preliminary arrangements, the trip was abandoned, and all remained
quietly at the house of Dom José Correa Leite de Moraes for the day. He
is a cousin of the Colonel.

Several gentlemen came to visit us from the surrounding country, and
dined with us. Among them was a Catholic priest, Senor Francisco
Ferreira Garcia, the vicar of this district, and Senor Lorenço de Arruda
Prado, another cousin of Colonel Joaquim.

The former had the misfortune to be thrown from his mule after bidding
some of our party good-by upon the road, but was not injured. The latter
appeared to be a very clever gentleman, and is said to be a successful
planter. In being introduced to him by my old friend, the Colonel, I was
informed of his relationship, and on his leaving, I extended the
customary assistance in mounting his mule, which is regarded here as a
simple act of courtesy to a gentleman who visits you. This act of
attention is a part of that general politeness which is observed among
the best class of Brazilians, and struck us, as it must every one not
familiar with the usages of the people, in the light of a menial service
that was not compatible with the relation of one gentleman to another,
yet custom makes it not only proper and becoming, but almost obligatory.
The party assisting usually looses the horse, holds the bridle, and
steadies the stirrups while the other mounts, and the guest is expected
to avail himself of this assistance without regard to the age or rank of
the person tendering it, though in some instances he may demur when he
thinks circumstances should preclude it.

Our host is lively and intelligent, speaking French with fluency, and
having a little knowledge of the English. Shortly after our arrival at
his house, I made some remark to him in Portuguese, which at first was
not understood, and he indicated his wish that it should be repeated, by
the usual word, “Como?” (How?) I used the same expression again and was
fully comprehended, and answered accordingly. Immediately after this,
General Wood’s interpreter, Mr. Snell, who is an Englishman that has
been a number of years in Brazil, spoke to the Dom in Portuguese, and
he, taking this to be another American with a slim stock of the
language, did not comprehend what was said, and replied to him, “Não
entendo,” (I don’t understand.) This gave us a good laugh upon Mr.
Snell. In my use of the language it was simply “Como?” but with him, who
was here as interpreter, the party addressed was compelled to say “Não
entendo,” taking him to be a novice in Portuguese. The fact is, that
while Mr. Snell understands the language well, and speaks it fluently,
he has a habit of cutting off the last syllable of his words, that makes
it somewhat difficult at times to gather the full meaning of his
remarks, and hence this mistake.

The lady of the house has evidently associated more with gentlemen than
most of those occupying a like position, and hence appears more at ease
in company, joining in general conversation with those who speak the
language. She departs greatly from the habit of our ladies by suckling
her child in the presence of gentlemen. Though she was in the
dining-room during our meals, the crowded table was perhaps a sufficient
reason for not being seated with us, and she was looking after the
proper supply of articles by the servants, though the Dom seemed to
assume the chief responsibility in this respect.

The culinary arrangements of this establishment, like most others in
Brazil, are under the same roof with the residence of the family, and
the fire is built upon the earthen floor in the open room, without any
other outlet for the smoke than is afforded by the spaces between the
tiles which cover the house. As it was rather cool during the evenings,
we took a seat in a circle around this fire, and thus had a very
sociable _family circle_, which gives me the key to an explanation of
that term, which has never before been fully understood.

Our host follows the course of his kinsman, Colonel Joaquim Lorenço, in
regard to the abundance of supplies upon his table at all three meals,
and supper is quite equal to breakfast in the variety of the articles. I
tell them that they give us three dinners every day, and if we were to
remain stationary, all would be foundered in a short time, or take the
gout, though I do not hear of this affection in the country.

We had for supper, this evening, a portion of the large fish called the
Jahu, from which the river and town derived their names. It is a huge
fish similar to our catfish, though the head is not so broad in
proportion to its size, and the meat tastes more like that of scale
fish. All relished it very much; and, though we had fared so well at
breakfast and dinner, the Jahu tempted us to eat heartily.

We had an opportunity of examining, to-day, one of the large lizards of
this country, called “lagarto,” and there is nothing to which it can be
better compared than a young alligator of two and a half feet in length.
The resemblance in its conformation to one of our small, gray lizards is
almost perfect, and the flesh is said to be very fine, but its
appearance is too suggestive of the class of reptiles for my taste. This
specimen was caught by a servant, and brought into the house, for our
inspection, while still alive. Many of them have been seen in the woods
during our tour, and they are said to be inimical to the poisonous
cobra, engaging and killing the snake whenever it is encountered. The
large number of these lagartos, and the few cobras, that are found in
our exploration of the forest, would favor the idea that the former have
established the mastery. In this view, the lagarto should be preserved
from injury, and, most assuredly, something more inviting can be found
for food.

The lagarto has a forked tongue like a serpent, and thrusts it out in
the same manner when disturbed. It is stated, also, that during the
winter months, though there be no frost, they live in a state of
torpidity after the mode of reptiles.


                                             MONDAY, _November 6, 1865_.

In accordance with previous arrangements, we were all supplied with
fresh animals by the fazendeiros of the neighborhood, and set out for
Sapé and the river Tieté. Reaching the fazenda of Senor Paulo Lima about
eight o’clock, after a ride of twelve miles, we found that he expected
us to stop and take breakfast. Though his house and the surroundings did
not present a very promising aspect, yet we found, in due course of
time, a most excellent meal was served to us, and all were highly
pleased with the plain courtesy of our host.

The lands lying between the Freguezia de Jahu and this point are located
upon either side of the river Jahu, and rather irregular in general
conformation. They are, for the most part, of a deep red color and of
firm consistence, with more or less of the fudra de ferro, constituting
the best quality of terra rocha. The Figeré Branca and the Pon d’Alho
are conspicuous in most parts of this territory, and indicate the
fertility of the soil.

Throughout this region, which includes a number of old settlements, and
others of more recent date, much of the matto virgem (original forest)
has been cleared off, and open fields of large extent are either in
cultivation or in pasture for the use of horses and cattle.

The Rio Jahu pursues a very tortuous course, with frequent falls or
rapids, and offers advantageous situations for machinery at various
points. It runs into the river Tieté about sixteen miles from the town
of the same name, Jahu; and the lands on each side of it, throughout
this extent, are of the best quality; yet the steep hills and rather
mountainous elevations of the precincts unfit some of the lands for
proper cultivation. These high and irregular portions of ground would be
very appropriate for coffee, as the hillsides and elevated lands are
usually selected for this crop; while the low flat lands in this section
are liable to some frost in the cold season.

I am informed that the quality of the soil is equally good to the
distance of three leagues, or twelve miles, on the north side of the Rio
Jahu, and to the distance of two leagues, or eight miles, on the south
side. In this extensive area there are a few small patches of less
valuable land, but in the main, it will be found that the soil is of the
deep red color, or of the dark brown order, and lying in many parts very
advantageously for cultivation.

After breakfasting we set out again, and passing the obscure capella of
Sapé, we travelled sixteen miles to the fazenda of Senor Louiz Pereira
Barbose, where we were expected by previous notice from our friend the
old Colonel. Though the house was small, and the resources for
accommodating so large a number rather limited, yet he manifested a
disposition to do all in his power for the comfort of the party.

We rode over a comparatively level region in coming from the house of
Senor Lima to this place, and though not giving evidence of so much
fertility as that near the Rio Jahu, it is generally of good quality,
and is well supplied with water for ordinary domestic purposes. There
was no portion of useless land seen upon this route, and no campos have
been encountered since leaving the town of Brotas. The timber throughout
this plateau is of good size, and much of it very favorable for
splitting to make fences, as the quarenta, which grows especially
abundant near the fazenda at which we are stopped. This tree is very
durable when made into rails, and has its name from the impression that
it lasts during forty years. In entering the premises, I observed the
neatest and most substantial fencing yet seen in Brazil, and was
informed that the rails are of this material. One end of the rails is
embedded in the earth, and they are arranged side by side in a
perpendicular form, with a cross-bar of the palmetto running
horizontally about two feet from the top, which is secured by being
lashed continuously with the sipo vine. This sipo is a long and slender
vine of surprising strength and flexibility, which is used for confining
the rafters of houses, tying timbers together where pegs or nails would
be used with us, baling cotton, and, indeed, for any purpose to which
ropes might be applied. It is called in common parlance the Brazilian
nail, and it is remarkable to what an extent it is made a substitute for
nails.

It is particularly well suited for constructing these stake-fences, and
no better enclosure can be devised for the protection of a crop against
large or small intruders.

General Wood, Doctor Warne, and Mr. Snell parted from the rest of us at
the house of Senor Lima, and went down to the mouth of the Jahu, and
descended the river Tieté in canoes for two miles. They gave a favorable
account of the general outline of the banks on each side, but found the
channel of the river so shallow in several places that the canoes came
in contact with the bottom, and it was requisite for the boatmen to draw
them over by getting out into the water. There was one point at which
there were rapids or falls, and they got out upon the shore, while those
in charge of the canoes carried them over the fall, receiving them again
below into the canoes.

This being a drought of many months continuance, the river is said to be
lower than it has been before for twelve years, and the ordinary level
of the water is stated to be six feet above its present state. It is
thought by persons acquainted with the river, that there is sufficient
water during the rainy months, to afford a passage for flat-bottomed
propellers to Perecicaba, from which point there is a wagon-road to
Campinas, and from thence the railroad will perhaps be available in a
few years.

From the account received, and from my personal inspection of the river,
I think there is but little prospect of navigating it with safety, and
unless there be a practicable route for a railway to this region of
country, its products must depend on transportation by pack-mules.

The elevated serra near Brotas is perhaps the most serious obstacle to a
railroad, and it remains for engineers to determine whether this can be
overcome.

If a line of railroad is extended to Araraquara, and can communicate
with the Rio Jaceré below Cambury, then this section of country lying
between the Tieté and Jaceré might avail itself of the Jaceré for
navigation up to that point, and thus get an outlet for its products.

The Jaceré is represented to have a deep and open channel from its mouth
up to Cambury; and all the rich region lying between it and the Tieté
and extending along the Jahu would be better accommodated by effecting
this result than to attempt to navigate the Tieté upwards.


                                            TUESDAY, _November 7, 1865_.

Having but a limited number of beds, our host provided some dried
raw-hides which were spread upon the dirt floor, and about one-half of
our party slept upon them, with their overcoats, &c., assisting to fill
out the scanty supply of bedding. There was no particular inconvenience
experienced except from the fleas, which found ready access to our
friends upon the hides and interrupted somewhat the quietness of their
repose. Mr. Snell and myself were perched upon a long high table, and
being thus above the jumping height of a flea we fared very well. I have
carried a blanket and pillow throughout my trip, and found them with my
overcoat very convenient on this occasion. A bed had been assigned to
me, but feeling that our good friend Senor Joaquim Lorenço should of all
others be provided for, I persuaded him to occupy the bed, and I slept
comfortably upon the table during the whole night.

With the good spirit exhibited by our host we all tried to be satisfied,
and though it was quite different from the comforts received at other
places, he evidently did the best which his resources would allow.

The meals were abundant and well prepared, with another large Jahu fish
to grace the table. As I had brought along some tomato catsup, it was
drawn forth on this occasion to give a zest to the fine fish, and the
entire bottle was consumed.

In connection with this, I have transported likewise from the outset,
four cans of tomatoes, two cans of mutton, and one can of partridge,
thinking that we would find ourselves in some situation where the
necessaries of life could not be obtained; yet we have had no occasion
to use them, and will not perhaps have need for them anywhere.

After an early breakfast, I set out with Dr. Warne, Dr. Wissen, Messrs.
Brown and Kernan, accompanied by Senor José Rebeiro Camargo, as our
escort and guide, to visit a portion of the lands lying between us and
the Rio Jaceré. This river was stated to be about sixteen miles distant,
and thinking it would be impracticable to make the trip to the river,
and return, I proposed to make a circuit, so as to return by a different
route from that upon which we went out. Passing some grounds under
cultivation shortly after starting, the corn and beans with sweet
potatoes gave fine promise of the coming crop, and the lands in this
vicinity are evidently of good quality; but after passing some miles
farther, there was an inferior grade of soil with occasional indications
of barrenness.

We made a halt at the house of Senor Ignacio Borgia Pedrosa, where wine
and coffee were served. Some large oxen in the front of the house showed
that the grass had nutritious properties, while some mares and colts
running at large presented a good appearance. Subsequent to this our
escort took us to the residence of Senor Candido Pereira Barbosa, but as
he was absent, and we did not wish to wait for dinner, we accepted the
tender of coffee, and made a lunch of sardines and cheese which had been
brought to meet our necessities. Upon riding into the fields we saw some
young coffee trees growing from the seed. They were two years old and
looked flourishing; but with great diversity in size, resulting probably
from a deficient stand when first planted, and requiring to be
replanted. No estimate could be made as to the result in maturing of the
coffee trees.

The lands here were of a reddish aspect, with a considerable portion of
sand, and presented a favorable appearance under cultivation; but the
soil is not equal to that of the lands adjacent to the Rio Jahu; nor
were any of the lands seen upon our route of the first order. For the
most part the surface was gently undulating, and this general tableau
was supplied with a variety of excellent timber, among which the
quarenta was observed to grow of full size, and abundantly.

The supply of water was confined to small branches or runs, that might
be made available for a monjolo, or perhaps for a small grist-mill, but
not adapted to machinery on a large scale. The largest stream traversing
this section of country was stated to lie somewhat beyond the line of
our route, and this may present more favorable conditions for
water-power. So far as my personal observation goes, the Rio Jahu is the
only reliance for the location of machinery anywhere convenient to this
territory.

We had quite an adventure in the attempt of Senor Camargo to ascend a
tree to gather some jaboticabas for us, and it had well nigh proved a
serious matter. The body of the tree having no limbs for some distance
up, he climbed as far as his strength would permit, and being unable to
reach the limbs, or even to sustain himself in his grasp upon the smooth
surface of the tree, he let loose and slided down most precipitately. He
then secured a pole to the side of the tree with sipo, and going to the
top of it had another handed up to him, which was secured above in like
manner, and thus he succeeded in getting us a delicious bait of the
fruit.

We returned by way of Sapé, which, though it has a few small houses in
close proximity, should not be recognized as entitled to a name. In
going up we passed this place without giving it a special notice; and
some of the party were not apprised that any place claiming a name had
been passed. It is simply a collection of some half dozen dirty hovels,
and yet has a shop, at which a thirsty gentleman in our party found he
could get a drink of cachaça, and stopped us to look at him go through
with the performance. The patron saint of this humble refectory was a
corpulent Frenchman, who had recently bought a considerable tract of
land in the neighborhood, and was holding it upon speculation. He
doubtless thought a good time was coming, when he was informed of our
object in visiting this section, and declined to sell even at an advance
of two millreas an alqueric, or sixteen and two-thirds cents per acre.

At the most remote point of our trip to-day land was valued at forty
cents per acre; while here, at Sapé, it is estimated at eighty cents per
acre; and between this point and Senor Lima’s one hundred dollars per
acre is the price affixed. In the vicinity of Jahu two hundred dollars
an acre was the valuation put upon a tract of land, which was equal to
any in the country, and thus the standard prices of this section may be
considered as fairly stated above, upon the authority of landowners.

We returned to our rendezvous a while before night, and found the rest
of the company had not stirred beyond the premises during the day; and
some of them were perched upon some timber for machinery that lay in the
yard, while others met us, while relaxing their limbs in a short walk
from the house toward the outer gate of the enclosure.


                                          WEDNESDAY, _November 8, 1865_.

We left the fazenda of Senor Louiz Pereira Barbose at 6 o’clock this
morning, after partaking of an early breakfast, and returned to the
house of our old friend Senor Lima. Here he had collected his breeding
stock for our observation; and though the mares were generally of small
size, there were a few very good young horses, and the colts for the
most part looked well. It is a little remarkable to observe how entirely
quiet the stallions are, when allowed to run at large in this way with a
promiscuous drove of animals. There was a jackass also running with the
stock, yet I saw no young mules; and the dull and lifeless aspect of
this animal gave no promise of an increase of his stock. There were
thirty mares, and if even this number were employed in rearing mules, it
would doubtless prove profitable; but this scrubby specimen of horses,
which are propagated, are not likely to give much return for the trouble
of looking after them. These animals subsist entirely upon grass, and
very rarely get salt, as it is too costly at these interior places to be
afforded for stock, except in very small quantities.

Dining with Senor Lima we proceeded afterward upon the same route by
which we had gone up, and reached the residence of Senor Dom Correa
Leite de Moraes at four o’clock in the afternoon. He and his wife
received us again most hospitably, and have extended all the kindness
possible to our whole party.

Our saddle-mules have remained here in his pasture, and been fed with
corn daily from his crib, while our clothing has been washed and ironed
in our absence. The pack-mules have been sent off this afternoon so as
to keep ahead to-morrow.


                                           THURSDAY, _November 9, 1865_.

Our cheerful and hospitable friend, Dom José Correa Leite de Moraes, and
his kind lady, received our cordial acknowledgments at leaving them this
morning. Our own mules being fresh, moved off with alacrity, and upon
reaching the Freguezia de Jahu, we were met by Senor José Rebeiro
Camargo, and invited to the house of his son-in-law, where wine and
coffee were served, and his wife and daughter came out to bid us adieu.
It was thought that this demonstration was in part for the purpose of
showing his unmarried daughter to one of the young men, to whom the
father had taken a fancy for a son-in-law. But I doubt if the impression
was well calculated to promote his wishes for incorporating an American
graft into his family. This young man was furnished with a list of the
entire family, and received a very cordial embrace from the father at
parting.

We breakfasted at the fazenda of Senor Joaquim Oliveiro Mattozinto, and
found him this time awaiting our arrival, with every thing in readiness
for giving us a substantial entertainment. He had very kindly furnished
mules for some of our party during the recent trip, and had accompanied
us in person until sickness made it necessary for him to return.

The land from Jahu to this fazenda is of superior quality, being of the
dark brown order, and as this is eight miles from the Rio Jahu, it may
be inferred that this fine soil extends to a like distance from the
river elsewhere on this side, which corresponds to the statement made in
regard to the breadth of good land extending along this stream.

The general health of this region of country is very good, yet there are
cases of chill and fever reported upon the Tieté and Jaceré, and
throughout the region lying adjacent to those water-courses. No instance
was brought to my knowledge of malarial disease remote from these
streams; and, from the general aspects of the country, I would not think
it likely to prevail to any considerable extent away from their margins.

I saw but two instances of goitre or bronchocele in this entire region
of country, and the information received from Dom Correa is conclusively
that they were not generated here, but imported from other parts. There
is no serra here, and so far as my observation goes, goitre is confined
to those living in the vicinity of the serras.

This section and the country about Araraquara are the only parts visited
thus far in which this ugly deformity did not prevail amongst the women.

It is not however confined to the women exclusively, as several
instances have been seen among males, and the condition of climate,
water, atmosphere, or diet, which promotes the development of this
condition, cannot be favorable to the constitutional health of those
exposed to its influence. No leprosy found here.

We halted at a small shop upon our route to-day, where oranges were sold
at the rate of four for a cent; and all of us having a relish for this
fruit, concluded we never could satisfy our taste more cheaply, so we
turned to and ate the whole stock in trade. One gentleman was reported
to have eaten fourteen oranges, but I thought that a full complement was
received with half of that number, and it puzzled me to know how any one
eat more than I did in the same length of time.

A large concourse of persons on horseback were met to-day, males and
females, dressed out in their best clothes. Some of them were provided
with musical instruments, and there was a train of pack-mules, upon one
of which there were two immense boxes, and sundry smaller trunks upon
the others. We understood that it was a movement to celebrate the feast
of the Holy Ghost at the Freguezia de Jahu, which is done yearly by the
Catholics here.

Returning by a different route from that of our trip in going up, we
encountered extensive campos, and soil generally of inferior quality,
until we reached the Serra de Brotas, upon which the land, as stated
previously, is very good, and lies favorably.

We reached the residence of Senor Domingos José Carneiro (son-in-law of
the old Colonel) this afternoon at 5 o’clock, when we were kindly
received by him and his wife, and found every thing arranged for the
comfort of the entire party.

A letter was received this afternoon from our faithful friend, Senor
Joaquim Lorenço, responding in the most feeling terms to a communication
made to him by our entire party in leaving his house. As the two letters
may be now inserted together, and may give those who read these pages an
idea of the relations subsisting with this noble-souled Brazilian, I
will give a translation of his in connection with that sent by us.


                                         ARARAQUARA, _November 2, 1865_.

The following-named persons, recently from the United States of America,
and their companions, have received such favors at your house and such
assistance from you in the examination of the lands of Araraquara, that
we desire to leave with you an expression of our great obligations and
our sincere thanks for your kindness.

Having visited this section in search of a future home for our families,
we have found you a friend that makes all of us desire to be your
neighbor, and to become residents of your section of this country.

We go to look at other lands, and to ascertain the resources of other
places, feeling that no people can extend to us a more cordial and
generous hospitality than we have received here from you.

With the most heartfelt gratification for your reception and treatment
during our sojourn with your family, please to accept our best wishes
for the happiness of yourself and those composing your household.

                                                      W. W. W. WOOD,
                                                      J. MCF. GASTON,
                              [Names of all others composing the party.]

TO ILLM. SENOR LENENTI CORONAL JOAQUIM LORENÇO CORREA.


                                               JAHU, _November 8, 1865_.

  GENERAL W. W. W. WOOD, DOM GASTON,
          and other gentlemen, companions of the voyage:

With undivided pleasure I received your letter of the second of the
current month, in which with great magnanimity you manifest your
sentiments of gratitude for the little or no service which I rendered
you during your brief stay in the woods of Araraquara.

In returning to your firesides, which in a short time you intend to
abandon, choosing for your new home and that of your children the land
of the Holy Cross, where it was my fortune to be born, say to your
countrymen that in this land there are generous hearts that sympathize
much with the southern inhabitants of the United States of North
America.

Coming to dwell in these lands, I hope you may be happy, promoting the
happiness of yourselves, and the future happiness of your children. And
you may be sure of this, that here you will always find one friend,
faithful and sincere.

                                                 JOAQUIM LORENÇO CORREA.


My personal relations to this gentleman inspired a sort of parental
regard for him, which makes me cherish this kind memento more perhaps
than others of the company, and I have therefore preserved the original,
as a souvenir of his friendship and generosity. We all desired to have a
likeness of our good friend, by which we might be constantly reminded of
that genial expression which springs from his pure heart; but the
photographists in this section are very poorly provided with materials,
and could not take the impression.

The high appreciation which all of us have for the character of Senor
Joaquim Lorenço is only in keeping with the estimate in which he is held
by all with whom we have conversed, in the vicinity of Araraquara; and
he is, with one accord, regarded as the leading spirit of all that
country. His title of Lieutenant-Colonel is by virtue of his position as
commandant of the national guard of the district, and from his admirable
management for our tour, I should expect him to conduct a campaign very
successfully. All was done quietly by him, and in his discipline upon
his premises no loud word or confusion ever occurred, but every thing
progressed with great regularity.


                                            FRIDAY, _November 10, 1865_.

Leaving the house of our kind host, Senor Domingos José Carneiro, we
descended the Serra de Brotas by a most precipitous route, differing
from that of our ascent, which was very steep, in being likewise very
rugged and narrow. It was not desirable to remain upon our mules in
making this passage down a steep, irregular, and rocky road, so that all
but one of the party dismounted, and lead our animals. The father of our
host, Senor José Venancio Carneiro, having spent the night with us, they
both accompanied us this morning, and upon arriving at the villa of
Brotas we found that the elder gentleman had arranged for us to take
refreshments at his house, where we had dined in passing through. The
table was provided with very fine canned peaches and other fruits, while
wine and coffee were also served, thus tempting us to eat, though we had
so recently taken a hearty breakfast where we spent the night.

How we parted finally with our true-hearted friend, Senor Joaquim
Lorenço Correa, which was quite a touching scene, in the manifestation
of deep feeling with him and with all of us.

In company with Senor Domingos we proceeded sixteen miles, for the most
part through a dreary campo, to the fazenda of Senor Francisco Antonio
Macede, who is a son-in-law of Senor José Venancio, and by whom we were
joined at this place in the course of the evening after our arrival.

Coffee was growing here in great luxuriance, and one single tree was
pointed out to us which yielded over one arroba (which is thirty-two
pounds) at a single crop. The trees were unusually large, and hence had
the appearance of being too crowded in most parts of the field.

Several patients were prescribed for at this place, and I was impressed
with the ingenuity displayed in a truss of domestic manufacture, which
was worn by a negro man, laboring under hernia. Of course, no charge was
made for advice anywhere, while enjoying the generous hospitalities of
the people, though they frequently asked for my bill, when services were
rendered, as at this place.

The sun was oppressively hot during the latter part of our ride to-day,
and this was followed by a shower of rain just as we arrived, but it was
slight, scarcely laying the dust. The country is suffering from need of
rain, and that topic, which ordinarily is regarded commonplace, becomes
now one of great interest to travellers as well as planters. While we
find the dust from a large number of animals occasionally troublesome,
the heat is of course more intense when the earth is dry and parched
than it would be if some evaporation was taking place from a damp
surface. Still, however, we do not find travelling in the heat of the
day attended with greater inconvenience than during the summer in the
Southern States, and we are now approaching the hottest season of this
latitude. It would be preferable for those exploring this country to
travel early in the morning and late in the evening, and the arrangement
of hours for breakfast and dinner could be made so as to lie by during
the entire hot portion of each day, with greater comfort to man and
beast.

A sumptuous lunch, brought by Senor Domingos, was eaten with oranges,
upon stopping to-day, and was followed by coffee furnished at this
place. It will be seen that these people know how to provide for the
inner man. A dinner of most ample proportions was served at six o’clock,
and all had to rally their appetites again.


                                          SATURDAY, _November 11, 1865_.

After taking breakfast at an earlier hour than usual, we left the
fazenda of Senor Francisco, accompanied by him and his father-in-law,
Senor José Venancio.

This old gentleman seems determined to make amends for his absence from
home when we first visited his house; and, in response to a letter of
introduction which I delivered to him, he said that he stood ready to
aid us in any way we might command his services. He said that in the
event our people should conclude upon coming anywhere in this region of
country, to give him notice, and transportation would be provided free
of cost to as many as he could find mules to accommodate, either of his
own or other parties.

My attention was attracted this morning by the peculiar yelping of a
large bird of the ostrich order, which I endeavored to get a sight of,
but being very shy, it ran away and was concealed in the thick shrubbery
of the campo.

We passed the small stream Rio Onca (tiger river) and the large and
clear water-course Rio Lobos (wolf river), where a small piece of matto
virgem (original forest) of good quality was entered, which was the only
relief to the extended campos, until we approached near to the fazenda
of Senor Joaquim Firmino de Oliveiro.

Here we stopped, and were regaled with an ample supply of jaboticabas,
that fruit which, once eaten, no one can ever fail to enjoy. Having
dined in a very substantial way with this gentleman, some of the party
concluded to remain there with General Wood for the night; while I came
with others to the city of Rio Claro, in the midst of a considerable
fall of rain.

We stopped at the house of Dr. J. H. Gattiker, a Swiss physician, and in
his absence were courteously received and entertained by his dignified
and yet affable lady.


                                            SUNDAY, _November 12, 1865_.

With our wants of every kind provided for in the best style, the beds
were especially neat, having damask covers lined with silk, and the
pillow-cases trimmed with fringe of the most tasteful pattern. The
towels were also of fine material, and each end trimmed with fringe.
Before making our toilet, coffee was served at our rooms in those
beautiful china cups which are found generally in the houses of the
better class of people. When I left my room, the Doctor was found in the
parlor waiting to receive us; and, knowing that any thing from the
United States, just now, would interest us, he went out and procured
some copies of the Presbyterian newspaper, from the house of the Rev.
Mr. Snyder, which were particularly appropriate for the day. I called,
subsequently, and saw Mrs. Snyder; but, not finding Mr. Snyder at home,
her tender of hospitality was declined for the present time.

General Wood and the rest of the party arrived in time to join us at a
very late breakfast, and it was really a feast of fat things, in great
variety and much good taste. I was seated at one end of the table, with
the lady of the house upon my left hand, and I made such use of my
limited stock of Portuguese as was necessary in communicating with her.

Some of our companions proposed to go to Ybicaba to-day, while the
General and myself, with Mr. Snell, as interpreter, concluded to remain
quietly here; and I wrote a lengthy communication for my friends, and
also a letter to my wife, as appropriate Sunday-work.

All of us dined together; and the most bountiful supply was arranged in
the greatest elegance upon the extended table, with a huge, fat turkey
dressed in the best style, from the carving of which the General
relieved our hostess.


                                            MONDAY, _November 13, 1865_.

Our kind hostess furnished us with a cup of most excellent chocolate,
before breakfast, this morning, though coffee had already been served
prior to leaving our rooms. The General said that all his needs were
supplied by this nutritious drink, and becoming very impatient at the
delay of breakfast, proposed to go without waiting for it. But Dr.
Gattiker would not hear of our going without breakfast; and, indeed,
after breakfast, we had great difficulty in getting off from him, as he
insisted we must spend the day at his house. I was favored with
photographs of the Doctor and his wife, which will be treasured up in
the collection of my friends in Brazil—she being a native of the
country.

Upon starting, it was found that my mule was suffering from the loss of
a shoe, and it became necessary for me to stop on the road, that he
might have it replaced. General Wood and Mr. Snell, in the mean time,
adopted my suggestion, and proceeded to Ybicaba. As the camaradas were
behind, I awaited their arrival, and, taking one of their mules, he
remained to bring mine when it was shod.

I made a fruitless attempt to advance upon this lazy and perverse mule,
but at length, in despair, stopped upon the roadside, and dismounted to
await the arrival of my own. Here, in the wild forest, it occurred to me
that a tiger or other wild beast might attack me, but I congratulated
myself that I could get out of the way faster on foot than upon this
stupid animal, and it might be that the carnivorous propensity of the
wild occupant of the woods would be satisfied with the tough carcass of
the old mule, which I would leave to his tender mercies.

I thought we had started with some of the most shabby animals that the
province could afford, but some of those which were left at Ybicaba by
General Wood’s party were even worse than the two left by us. These
animals were such as had been in use for the military service, and were
turned out upon such pasturage as the lands around the city of São Paulo
would furnish, which, from notice under a former date, may be inferred
would not have the effect of improving their flesh or strength. Of such
as the President had, gave he unto us; and we were thankful for the
small service they rendered in getting us to places where we were
generously supplied by our friends with better animals.

A few of the public animals were retained for the trip by General Wood’s
party, and we kept two mules in service that were improved by the
regular feeding, with comparatively light work under our pack-saddle.

As we are booked to remain as the guests of Senor Vergueiro to-morrow,
it is expected that some of the camaradas will proceed with this drove
of emaciated horses and mules in advance, so as to allow them to move
leisurely. Some of them are scarcely able to drag their bare bones
along, and they will accordingly go in light-moving order, without
incumbrance of any sort.

The entire number of horses and mules belonging to both parties amounts
to thirty-three, and there are about one-half the number belonging to
parties at different points on the road, who had furnished them for the
expedition, while perhaps there are a half dozen of the public animals
in service, leaving ten of the nondescripts going loose.

                                           TUESDAY, _November 14, 1865_.

The following items are furnished by Senor José Vergueiro as the
standard valuation of articles in this section:

                       HORSES.                             PRICES.
 Tamed and broken                                     $25.00 to   $40.00
 Untamed                                               20.00 to    25.00
 Mares                                                  4.00 to     6.00
 Stallions same as castrated.
 Jacks                                                 50.00 to   100.00

                       MULES.                              PRICES.
 Broken for pack-mules                                $30.00 to   $35.00
 Riding                                                40.00 to    50.00
 Untamed, by the lot                                   12.50 to    15.00
 Pack-saddles                                          10.00
 Ox-hides, (sun-dried)                                  1.00 to     2.50
 Oxen for work, (pair)                                 30.00 to    40.00

                        HOGS.                              PRICES.
 For fattening, (each)                                 $4.00 to    $5.00
 Fattened (neat) per pound                             4½    to 5 cents.
 Breeders, (each)                                      $3.00 to    $4.00
 Pigs, (according to stock)                             1.00 to     7.00
 Sheep, (not much grown)                                  75 to     1.00
 Goats                                                  1.00 to     1.50
 Cows, (milch, by lot)                                  7.00 to     7.50
 Cows, (milking, single)                               12.50 to    15.00
 Calves                                                 2.50
 Bulls, (according to breed)                           30.00 to    50.00
 Bullocks, (not fattened)                              10.00 to    11.00
 Bullocks, (fattened)                                  12.50 to    20.00

                      NEGROES.                             PRICES.
 Men, women and children together                    $500.00 to  $750.00
 Men separately                                       900.00 to  1000.00
 Hire of men and women from Minas                      40.00 to    60.00

The above with feed, clothing and medical attention by year.

 Corn, (now 50 cents to 75 cents,) average   per
   bushel                                                             25
 Beans, (now $3.00 to $5.00,) average per bush.           75 to     1.00
 Rice, (now $4.00 to $5.00,)   „       „    „             75 to     1.25
 Cotton in seed, per hundred pounds                     3.75 to     4.00
 Coffee, (retail in country,) per pound                    8 to       12
 Leather, per side                                      1.50 to     2.50
    [20]Hats, (home-made,) of fur, $2.00 to $2.50; of wool, $1.00 to
 $1.50.

Dom João Guilheoma D’Aguier Whitaker, Juiz de Direita, da Comarca de São
João de Rio Claro, informs us that he has been directed by his family
connection and friends to put at the service of our people, when they
may arrive at Santos, a sufficient number of mules to transport them and
their effects.

Senor Vergueiro has furnished General Wood with thirty-six different
varieties of wood, which are to be found in the district of Lemaire, and
suited to different domestic purposes, of which the names are given
below.

  Arindiaba, (very durable.)
  Cabrinba, (for building.)
  Yssé, (for building.)
  Saguaragy, (for building.)
  Sucupyra, (for building.)
  Tayúba, (for building.)
  Assaçafrá, (for building.)
  Canella preta, (for building.)
  Jacoranda, (rose wood.)
  Cavyúna, (for building.)
  Gualrynoyra, (for building.)
  Jataby, (for building.)
  Cajarâna, (for building.)
  Araribá, (for fencing.)
  Guaranta, (splits well for rails.)
  Peroba, (fine canoes.)
  Peroba-Merim, (for building.)
  Guarabytá, (for building.)
  Cedro, (door and window shutters.)
  Jiquitiba, (for building.)
  Timbo, (for building.)
  Gleo, (valuable fruit.)
  Guatambu, (for fencing.)
  Açoita-Carallos, (for building.)
  Caxétas, (for building.)
  Vatinga, (for building.)
  Alecryser, (for building.)
  Chimbé, (for fencing.)
  Batáia, (canoes.)
  Maria Preta, (for building.)
  Figueira, (for building.)
  Jugá, (for building.)
  Guabiroba, (for building.)
  Guarahyúba, (for fencing.)
  Pitanga, (for fencing.)
  Jaboticaba, (delicious fruit.)

These specimens of wood represent the useful growths of timber in this
district of the province of São Paulo, and there are likewise a great
number of palm trees, different qualities of cane, (bamboo and
taqueira,) with a variety of vines, of which the sipo is especially
valuable for cordage and other uses.

The guaranta is the best material for fencing, as it splits readily and
is very durable. The hardness of most of the wood in this country is the
most serious obstacle to using it in the form of plank.

Specimens of the following-named grasses have likewise been furnished to
General Wood:

  Gramminha.
  Gramminha fina.
  Pé de galinha.
  Passuam.
  Cassium Gerdura.
  Gramma Naturæ.
  Gramma larga.
  Cassium Milham.*
  Cassium Angelinha.*
  Cassium de Angola.*

Those marked thus * are suitable for cutting and curing as hay, and we
find this fazendeiro has a considerable amount dried and stored away for
use as may be required.

As there is no frost here to destroy the grass, and animals can run upon
the pastures throughout the year, very few persons think it necessary to
cure hay, yet these high grasses are cut and fed to milch cows, or to
horses that are not put out to graze, and thus they are very useful.

During the cooler months of winter, and when there is a protracted
drought in the warm season, none of the grasses grow so luxuriantly, and
the grazing is of course much impaired, so that it is very convenient to
lay up a supply of hay, as is done at this place during the season of
full development, and retain it to meet emergencies.

This region of country is more particularly adapted to agricultural
operations, and makes a better return under cultivation than to be used
for pasturage, yet grass is produced of the best quality when it is
allowed to grow naturally or the land is planted artificially with
either the seed or the radicals of the different grasses. One of the
varieties of cassium is propagated entirely by transplanting the roots,
from which it extends.

Combining a notice of the habits and customs of the people with a record
of their material resources, it is my privilege to note the
entertainment given us to-day by our host. Quite a number of his friends
were invited to join us at dinner, and the preparations for the feast
were most elaborate. There were twenty-six persons seated at the table,
including the lady of the house, whose quiet dignity gave a grace to the
elegant style in which all was arranged. Our party were seated in
juxtaposition to each other, General Wood being in the middle, and
having Dr. Warne on his left hand and myself on his right. On the
opposite side to us was seated Mr. Henry Whitaker, who was to act as
interpreter. From this portion of the table there extended at right
angles two wings, at which the other guests were seated, Senor Vergueiro
being at the end of one of the wings and Dom Whitaker, Juiz Direita, at
the end of the other. Senhora was seated at one of the angles adjoining
the portion of the table occupied by our party, and thus as will be
perceived entirely separated from her husband.

A description of the numerous dishes, and the many varieties of liquors
and wines, is out of my power, as it was far more extensive than we are
accustomed to see at a dining.

Early in the progress of the substantial part of the dinner, Senor
Vergueiro arose and addressed those present as to his object in thus
assembling his fellow-citizens with us around his table, closing with a
sentiment complimentary to all our party, and mentioning by name General
Wood and myself. To this the General responded at considerable length,
closing with a toast to our host and hostess, when I made some remarks
and toasted the authorities of Brazil, and the counties of Rio Claro and
Lemeire; Dr. Warne responded to a sentiment from Judge Whitaker, and
gave a toast, and, in like manner, Mr. Kernan being called out, made a
few remarks and gave a toast.

All the remarks in either language were interpreted by Mr. Whitaker as
the speakers proceeded, each making a pause between sentences, and thus
all was mutually understood, giving the whole proceedings a fine effect.

A large proportion of the Brazilian guests joined in the expression of
sentiments welcoming our people to this province, and manifesting much
interest in the result.

After spending an hour at the table Mrs. Vergueiro retired, much after
the style with us, and the festivities were kept up for three hours,
amidst the most vociferous cheering and singing. This reminded me very
much of some of the public dinners of our associations or societies, and
we could scarcely realize that it was merely a collection of gentlemen
at a private house.

When the scenes at the table were ended, by a toast to the Emperor, the
company went to the saloon adjoining the dining-room, and engaged during
the evening in various stag dances and comic plays. Even blindman’s buff
was joined in by the parish priest, who was in attendance, and seemed to
enjoy the sports hugely. Some of the recreations consisted in rehearsals
of the pastimes of the lower order of people (called here caipira) when
they have gatherings in the country, such as we would style a frolic or
break-down.


                                         WEDNESDAY, _November 15, 1865_.

A large portion of the company having spent the night under the
hospitable roof of our host, they left early this morning for their
homes, and we were served with an early breakfast preparatory to our
renewing our travel. Arriving at the villa of Lemeira, we stopped a
short time at the house of Captain Lonço Franco, who took such a fancy
to his brother larador (farmer) Mr. Brown, that he presented him with a
likeness of his wife. Ale, wine and brandy were produced for the
company, but we found much difficulty here, as elsewhere, in procuring
water to drink, from the fact that no pails or buckets for holding water
are ever kept in their houses. The article ordinarily used is a sort of
earthenware jug or large bottle, but this is frequently not supplied
with water, and it consequently has to be sent off to be filled when
water is desired.

So far as I have observed there are no wells in this country, and upon
inquiring why they were not used, the statement was made that there was
no need for them, as there is an abundance of fresh running water to be
found everywhere. The proximity to a spring seems to be a matter of
little moment, and consequently the water is not often found very cool.
Indeed, ice seems to be in very little demand in the cities, as there
are machines for its manufacture at several points, which are not
employed, and yet this article sells in Rio de Janeiro for ten cents per
pound by retail.

We proceeded to the inn at the bridge of Atibaia for dinner, and
afterwards to another inn at Quilambo, where our party spent the night.


                                          THURSDAY, _November 16, 1865_.

Mr. Snell having gone forward last night to Campinas, where he resides,
was requested to advise Senor Joaquim Bonifacio D’Amaral, alias
Settequéda, that we would come to his house this morning for breakfast.
Moving accordingly at an early hour, we rode sixteen miles, and upon
entering the city, we met our friend, Senor Joaquim, with a party of
other gentlemen on horseback, who came out to escort us to his house in
Campinas.

It is eminently becoming that honor should be given where it belongs,
and therefore, as a matter of history, I will state that General W. W.
W. Wood was the object and prime cause of these demonstrations made at
different points upon our route. Prior to joining him, I saw nothing of
this kind of display on the part of the people, and pursued a very quiet
business-like course in my associations with the inhabitants of the
different sections visited. As there is nothing else to occupy my
attention in passing again over the road previously travelled, it is
very satisfactory to witness these manifestations in behalf of the
representative of seven States.

We found every thing in complete order upon our arrival, and rooms with
the neatest possible outfit for each of us. After washing and getting a
cup of coffee breakfast was announced, and the ladies of the house were
met in the dining-room, when I advanced and shook hands as with old
friends. Senhora seemed to take quite an interest in my small
acquisitions in Portuguese since my previous visit to the family, and I
was encouraged to use all in my power, talking for myself and a little
likewise for the General and others seated near me.

Dr. Reinhardt and Dr. Vaz, practitioners of the city, were met here, and
the former coming some years ago from the United States, speaks our
language fluently; while the latter uses some words and sentences of
English, but slowly and imperfectly. I attempted to talk Portuguese to
him while he responded in English, and we managed to communicate most
matters that either desired to speak. As there were quite a number of
the gentlemen of the city invited to breakfast with us, I made the
acquaintance of some of the best people in the place, and renewed my
acquaintance with Senor Joaquim Egydio de Sonsa, who is not so demure as
he seemed upon my former meeting with him.

He accompanied Dr. Vaz, Dr. Warne, and myself to his city residence, for
the purpose of eating jaboticabas; and while I enjoyed the fruit, I was
much more favorably impressed with his bearing than previously. We saw
there, also, a specimen of the small stingless bee of this country,
which makes its receptacle for the honey in the hollow of a tree or the
crevice of a wall, and affords the most delicious article that is ever
made by any of the bee class.

There was a variety of fruit trees in the garden of this gentleman, and
among them a specimen of the peach; which was, however, of inferior
quality, as are all seen in any part of the country.

A large company was invited to join us at dinner to-day, and the
entertainment was most sumptuous; with a fine turkey in addition to a
fine old ham, and other meats, and as a compliment to the dessert, a
plum pudding held a conspicuous place. This last delicacy was dressed in
a way that I have not been accustomed to see; loaf sugar being placed
over it, and then Cognac brandy poured upon this, and set on fire by a
strip of paper which accompanied the lighted candle. I confess in this
matter to have shown my greenness, as I really did not understand the
programme until it was explained to me; and this account of the after
dinner scene may enable some other person to avoid showing their
ignorance. This dish is called here by its English name, _plum pudding_;
and in like manner, _roast beef_ is known by this name among the best
families.

I was quite surprised when asked by the lady of the house, “Quere plum
pudding?” and upon inquiry I was informed that when this article was
imported the name was imported with it.

While we were yet engaged with the meats, Dr. Vaz arose, and
representing our host, made a short speech of welcome to us, and closed
with a sentiment embodying all by name. To show his appreciation of the
compliment, the General made rather a lengthy address for a dinner
table, and toasted the Emperor of Brazil and the province of São Paulo.

With a few preliminary remarks, I gave the sentiment that Settequéda and
São Lorenço would long be remembered as the homesteads of our best
friends. Dr. Warne premising some remarks, toasted our host and hostess.

General Wood not being well, begged to be excused, and retired to his
room before the exercises were concluded, when Dr. Vaz went out to
minister to him. Commendador Egydio and Senor Dom Pinto made addresses
complimentary to our people, and calculated to encourage our movement to
this country.

The remarks on this occasion were interpreted by Mr. Bennaton, as each
speaker proceeded, and quite an awkward scene occurred from the deafness
of Dom Pinto, who had not perceived that the remarks were interpreted;
and when he rose to speak, afforded no opportunity for the interpreter
to repeat his words; who consequently had to abandon the undertaking and
leave the Dom to proceed without any prospect of being understood by our
party.

After dinner I went with Dr. Reinhardt to his house and received much
information as to the country and the medical profession of the city. He
tells me that the physicians here realize from $5,000 to $7,000 per
annum, and that the plantations of coffee around the place afford a
considerable share of the business. He thinks of coming to the United
States after a few years for the purpose of educating his children,
having married and raised a family in Brazil.

The most attractive feature of the hospitalities of Senor Joaquim
Bonifacio was the party given in the evening, at which there were
present many of the elite, with several very pretty and sprightly young
ladies. The daughters and wife of Dr. Vaz were introduced to me and
others of our party by himself; and these fine-looking and
elegantly-dressed young ladies were the stars of the evening, though
there were others who were much admired by the gentlemen of our party.
General Wood having recovered from his indisposition, danced with
several of the ladies, and appeared the gayest among the gay. Dr. Warne
also danced several rounds, and even enjoyed the intimate relations of a
waltz with the younger daughter of Dr. Vaz. The older daughter had the
lower part of her fine skirt torn in the dance, and in assisting her to
pin it up, I made a blunder, by saying “sua vestida muito ruim.”

The idea that I wished to convey was, that her dress was in bad
condition from this accident; but I learned afterwards that the true
import of my words was, Your dress is very worthless. It is to be hoped,
however, that she would attribute it to my ignorance, though I observed
at the moment that she had rather a peculiar expression of
dissatisfaction, and made no reply to my remark.

The music on this occasion was very superior; there being one band with
brass instruments at the outer front door where the company were
assembling, and another band which made music for the dancing when it
began about 9 o’clock in the evening. At the close some pieces were
performed upon the piano by a gentleman, and accompanied by a
cornet-a-pistons, which received the undivided attention of the
assemblage.

The refreshments were served upon waiters by the gentlemen in
attendance, and the wants of every one were looked after assiduously.
This is a feature of difference that will strike all as corresponding to
the courtesy alluded to in regard to rendering assistance in mounting,
and more remarkable in a slave country where the houses are supplied
with excellent servants.

Tea, chocolate, and coffee were handed, with quite a variety of cakes
and sweetmeats; while at the close of the evening, or rather the
morning, for it was then 2 o’clock A. M., a concentrated chicken-soup
was served in teacups. This struck me as very proper to meet the
exhaustion incident to the active exercise and loss of sleep at this
late hour, and yet it was new.

Though the want of a common tongue was embarrassing to all parties, the
evening passed very pleasantly.


                                            FRIDAY, _November 17, 1865_.

While there was much elegance and many conveniences connected with the
large establishment in which we were quartered, we were surprised to
learn that there was no privy about the place, and the only alternative
was the use of chamber-pots in the rooms for all the uses of such
places. The repugnance felt with American gentlemen to this proceeding
is not lessened by the necessity of their situation in the midst of a
city, and one of the improvements much needed in the domestic
arrangements of this country is the addition of latrines to their
premises. If a room was set apart for offices of this kind, it would
obviate some of the embarrassments; yet a neat privy kept in good order
is a very genteel appendage to an establishment; and by inviting to the
regular discharge of the functions of the intestinal canal, it exercises
a beneficial influence on health, and the general comfort of a family.

Upon being introduced to a lady in the house as the sister of our host,
I was informed by him that she was the mother of his wife, which of
course makes him the uncle of his wife. Had I not found previously that
this kind of marriage takes place here very frequently, and that among
the best class of people, it would have been regarded as a matter of too
much delicacy to refer to in a record of this kind. In three instances,
of the most intelligent and most refined people met with in this
country, the lady is the niece of her husband, and I must forbear to
express my convictions of the consequences that must be entailed upon
posterity by this course.

It was arranged that we would leave this morning; and, in consideration
of the temporary illness of the General last evening, a carriage was
provided, with four horses, to convey him to Jundiahi, and Mr. Bennaton
takes a seat with him.

The rest of us being ready to go in advance, moved off on horseback,
escorted out to the edge of the town by Senor Joaquim Bonifacio and
several of his friends. He pointed out on the way a number of houses
occupied by Germans who were formerly colonists upon this place, and
also their school-room filled with children, which, taken together,
indicates that they are getting along prosperously in their new homes.

We stopped upon the road to-day at an inn (hospidaria) kept by one of
these German families, who had collected a considerable property in a
few years, and they now have a plantation with several slaves, in
connection with a thriving house of entertainment for travellers. Most
of those who entered business originally with some of the Fazendieros as
colonists, have since attained to a moderate competency, and settled
themselves upon small farms or engaged in mercantile business.

Campinas is surrounded by large and flourishing coffee plantations, and
is the residence of many wealthy planters, yet I understand that there
is not much trade of any kind conducted in the city. Should the
projected railroad be built in a reasonable time, it will enhance the
importance of this city vastly, and it will then become attractive as a
location for business and as a place of residence for families. I await
the result with a feeling of interest.

On our route to-day we found that three out of the number of disabled
public animals had been left at different points, as it was
impracticable for them to travel with the train, while the others
proceeded to our place of stopping, within one mile of Jundiahi.

This inn, kept by Senor José Pinto, is a fair sample of these houses of
entertainment for travellers, and though we were molested with fleas as
we went up, the general provisions for our accommodation were as good as
are usually found at these places. There are two young women about the
house, who are daughters of the proprietor, and don’t seem to have any
fear of strangers, attending promptly to all their wants. The
proprietor, who is generally known as Barão (the Baron), is immensely
corpulent, and locomotes as little as possible, yet he learns every
thing that can be communicated by persons passing in either direction,
and is regarded as the best authority for what is going on in the
country.

One of the small forest hogs, called tité, that are abundant in some
regions we have visited, was seen domesticated at this place. It looks
very much like we might expect a cross between a hog and a goat to
appear, being of a gray color, and without any tail, but with a head
corresponding very much to that of the ordinary swine.

This animal rarely exceeds fifty pounds weight, and is an excellent
article for the table, the flesh being delicate and tender. The woman
who owned this desired to sell it to us, but as our transportation was
not suited for the accommodation of life-stock, it had to be left for
some other purchaser.

A well-assorted and abundant supply of eatables was sent by our hostess
at Campinas to meet our wants for the day, and nothing was required at
the inn.


                                          SATURDAY, _November 18, 1865_.

Being aroused early this morning we were served with a cup of coffee by
Barão, and prepared for the road. The General rode into the villa of
Jundiahi in the four-horse carriage, and there dismissing the driver and
equipage to return to Campinas, he mounted his mule again, feeling much
reinforced for the journey.

One of the camaradas was sent back by Mr. Bennaton with money to pay for
the attention given by parties on the road to the disabled animals, and
with instructions to bring them forward leisurely, so as to return them
to the government authorities at São Paulo.

As I did not care to remain at Jundiahi, while the General was
undergoing the transfer from his four-horse carriage to the mule, I came
on in advance and reached the house of Mr. D. H. Sampson at Cachoeira
about 9 o’clock. My kind friend here expressed his satisfaction at my
return; and when informed that the rest of the party were on the way, he
proceeded to order breakfast for all.

We soon heard the sound of the horn, which General Wood had carried with
him throughout the tour, giving his signals for moving or stopping, and
on various other occasions as his fancy dictated.

The entire party rested at Cachoeira until the afternoon, when the
General and his party proceeded to an inn called Peru, twelve miles
distant; and Mr. Bennaton remained with me for the night, under the
hospitable roof of friend Sampson.


                                            SUNDAY, _November 19, 1865_.

Rising before daylight, the French cook Philipe, who has charge of Mr.
Sampson’s establishment, gave us a cup of coffee with bread and butter,
and we mounted our mules for a direct ride of twenty-eight miles to São
Paulo. The excellent mule which had been furnished me by Mr. Gephardt
for the trip was placed at my service by Mr. Sampson for the ride to the
city; and I feel under the greatest obligations to these gentlemen for
their disinterested kindness to me in this and in other matters.

The spirit of accommodation manifested by Mr. D. H. Sampson, with his
acts of generosity to myself and others who have come from the Southern
States, makes us realize that the interest he has taken in our cause is
extended to us; and for myself, I shall always feel grateful to him for
his substantial favors, and his courteous attentions extended to me.

In following the grade of the railway we passed the termination of the
iron rail twelve miles from the city of São Paulo, and learned from a
man engaged on the road that there would be an interruption of some
months, from a land-slide at the Serra de Santo having stopped the
transportation of iron. This serra is likely to be a very serious
obstacle to the success of the road, as even when in working order the
inclined plane, with four stationary engines to draw up the cars, is an
inconvenient arrangement, and not by any means free from danger. The
effect of these repeated land-slides must be unfavorable to our
prospects of making a settlement in the interior, and it thus becomes
more important to ascertain whether some other locality may not prove
more advantageous.

We reached São Paulo at noon, General Wood and his party having arrived
an hour previously.

After breakfast and a bath, I walked down to give a letter to Mrs.
Blackford from her husband, and to inquire for letters from my wife and
friends. It was a great disappointment to find no letters here, nor at
the post-office; and my only hope now is, that there may be letters for
me at Rio de Janeiro, on my arrival there.

During the afternoon I was called upon at the Hotel da Europa by Senor
João Ribeiro de Santos Carmargo, and at the same time General Wood was
visited by Senor Dom Joaquim Antonio Pinto, Junr.

The question of an emigration association being presented by General
Wood to Dom Pinto, he said that he would confer with his friends in
regard to such an organization. He made out a list of names that would
probably be favorably disposed in this matter, and that would be
requested to meet here to-morrow at 12 o’clock, in regard to the plan of
proceeding.

It was found this afternoon that one of General Wood’s trunks,
containing specimens of coffee, wood, and grass, was missing; and as it
was supposed that the camarada Manoel, or the servant Fortunatus, should
be held responsible for its return, the police were advised of the facts
and arrested the former, committing him to jail for further
investigation.

This trunk had been taken first to the quarters of Senor Street, under
the impression that it contained articles belonging to him; but on
finding that it was to go to the hotel, the camarada intrusted it to a
negro that was not personally known to him, and nothing has been heard
of it since.


                                            MONDAY, _November 20, 1865_.

With a view to dispose of the matter referred to last in my previous
record, I may state that General Wood had the camarada Manoel released
from confinement this morning. He then set about investigating the
locality of the negro man to whom he had given the trunk, and while we
were at dinner, Manoel came in with the trunk, exciting the sympathy of
all present by his manner, and the known fact of his innocence as to the
miscarriage of the trunk. It seems, according to the statement, that the
negro brought the trunk to the hotel, but not knowing the name of the
person for whom it was intended, he remained for a time, and then, with
a view to secure his fee when it was delivered, took it to his own
quarters.

In compliance with the request of General Wood, I wrote out to-day for
him a report of the recent tour and examination of the lands of
Araraquara and Jahu, with a proposition to adopt this region as a
location, if proper facilities can be afforded by the government of
Brazil. He expects to submit this to the President of the province of
São Paulo during an audience to-morrow, and it is supposed that this
official will recommend measures for accomplishing the object in view to
the Minister of Agriculture at Rio de Janeiro.

I was asked by the General to go to his room for an introduction to the
gentlemen assembled there, for conference as to an association to
promote emigration, and found the following persons present: Senor Dom
Joaquim Antonio Pinto, Junr., Senor Dom Bernardo d’Avelino Gavião, Senor
Dom Fidelis Nepormecino Prates, Senor João Ribeiro de Santos Carmargo,
Commendador Vicente de Sonsa Queiroz, and Senor Dom Martinho da Silva
Prado.


                                           TUESDAY, _November 21, 1865_.

I accompanied General Wood to-day to call upon the President of the
province at 12 o’clock, and the General handed him his report, with the
map of the country traversed, as made out by Mr. Street, the engineer,
who accompanied him throughout the tour. The General made some remark in
regard to my co-operation with him, which being interpreted to the
President, he desired to know if I concurred with General Wood in
considering these lands desirable for my friends, and whether he would
be authorized to state this fact to the Minister of Agriculture. I
replied, that of the lands which had been examined I was most pleased
with those included in the limits indicated; though it might then have
been further stated that I had not seen all that was desirable to enable
me to make a proper selection.

At 4½ o’clock P. M. we met the gentleman who called yesterday at General
Wood’s room, at the palace of the President, where this official was
present, with the following other persons of distinction, viz.: Barão de
Itapetininga, Barão de Ignape, Barão de Rio Claro, Dom Luiz Antonio de
Sonsa Barros, Dom Silveirio Rodriquez Jordão.

After a short period of silent suspense, General W. W. W. Wood rose, and
with Mr. Bennaton as interpreter, proceeded to lay before this dignified
and highly respectable assemblage his views in regard to the objects to
be attained by the organization of a society to promote emigration to
Brazil, and especially to this province. But he concluded with referring
any action that might be thought proper to the discretion of those
present who might feel interested in the movement. He subsequently
requested that Dom Gavião would give his views to the meeting, which he
did at some length without rising from his seat; and as Mr. Bennaton
stated subsequently, quite favorably to the object in contemplation.
General Wood then made a few remarks further, touching the subject under
consideration, at the close of which I suggested that we should retire,
and leave our Brazilian friends to deliberate freely upon all points
they might desire to discuss. It was accordingly so announced, and we
took our leave of this select assemblage.

I called early this morning upon Senor Bento Alves, No. 10, Rua do
Commuveio, to make arrangements for visiting a fazenda, called Bananal,
some sixteen miles from the city. Finding he had but one animal at hand,
I had to wait until next day for him to procure one for me, and we
expect to go to-morrow morning at 6 o’clock, without any interpreter.


                                         WEDNESDAY, _November 22, 1865_.

The result of the meeting yesterday was the formation of an association
to promote emigration, with the following appointment of officers:

For President, Barão de Ignape.

For Vice-President, Commendador Queiroz.

To Draft a Constitution, Commendador Queiroz, Dom Bernardo Gavião, and
Dom Pinto, Junr.

Thus we have the initiation of a very important movement for the
interest of those who may come from the Southern States to this
province; and the only feature that strikes me unfavorably is, that the
president is quite an old man, without that energy which a younger
person could bring to the work. If it can be brought into that practical
and efficient operation which the expressions of favor would warrant, we
may confidently rely upon something being effected for the advantage of
emigrants from the Southern States.

I rode with Senor Bento Alvez to-day, to visit the Fazenda Bananal; and
though he understood nothing of English I managed to use enough
Portuguese to make him understand me, and I guessed pretty successfully
at what he said to me on the way.

The first five miles of our route was over a most excellent public
highway, to the Frequezia Penha, which has cost the province a round sum
of money; but there are very few buggies or carriages to enjoy this fine
drive. I was especially struck with the great number and variety of
crosses, made of wood, that stood upon the roadsides after passing this
little village; and my travelling companion never came opposite to one,
without raising his hat, as an act of religious veneration. Some of
these crosses indicate that a death has occurred near, or serve as a
talisman. It is so common to see a cross upon the roadsides, in various
portions of this country, that I have endeavored to get some
intelligible explanation of their design; but no one seems to have any
more satisfactory solution than that these people think that they secure
some immunity from all harm by the presence of a cross. They are seen
very frequently at the forks of roads, at the point where a family path
leads into the main road.

If a murder has occurred at any particular spot, there a cross is
certainly erected; and as murders were very ordinary occurrences
throughout certain portions of this country in former years, it may be
that most of the crosses, remote from dwellings, indicate the site of a
murder. These crosses are frequently covered by a small house, and
garlands of flowers will sometimes be seen, either fresh or decayed,
upon them. There is a basis of superstition connected with all this,
which the intelligent Roman Catholics of Brazil ignore and lament; yet
the mass of the people, in their ignorance, continue to practice these
things with a reverential awe.

In lieu of breakfast we stopped at a wayside inn, and got a cup of
coffee, which was enjoyed with my cold lunch of beef and bread given me
by the landlady at the Hotel da Europa.

Being now in good riding-trim, and being mounted upon an easy-going
horse, I took the lead, so as to hurry up my Brazilian friend. He is of
Spanish extraction; and not much more of the go-ahead in his composition
than pertains to the character of most of these people, who have grown
up under the idea that to-morrow is as good as to-day.

Upon entering the lands of the fazenda we first encountered an extensive
level plain, which is called “campo largo.” This was covered with a
short grass, that seemed to be relished by the cattle and horses which
were grazing upon different parts of it. The cattle seemed in good
order, but the horses and a few mules looked shabby and rather thin, as
if they did not receive the same benefit as the other stock from the
grazing.

The soil was almost black, and with the use of the plough might yield
other grasses; or it might prove productive if planted in corn or peas.
Yet this experiment has yet to be made, and is certainly attended with
much doubt.

This campo largo is separated from the other land, that lies more
irregular in its conformation, by a stream of water, such as we would
style a creek. On the other side of this the land ascends into a range
of mountain elevations, whose sides can only be cultivated with great
difficulty by the hoe. Upon these slopes the land is of a dark gray
aspect, corresponding more to the appearance of some of the up-country
lands in South Carolina than any I have seen here.

The houses composing the site of this fazenda are located at the foot of
this range of elevated land, and in a central position as to the
territory. There is a good dwelling, of moderate size, having a plank
floor, glass windows, and a tile roof. The outhouses are inferior in
quality, yet capacious, and meet the needs of the establishment. A
monjolo is worked by water, brought in a race from the stream spoken of,
and there is an old apparatus formerly used for grinding mandioca, which
is now out of order, but might be turned to practical account.

After a plain, substantial dinner, the examination of the lands was
resumed, and we visited two sites where families were located, but the
positions were not well suited for dwellings. Indeed, there are no good
situations for the residence of families anywhere on the place, as the
chief location is almost inaccessible from the irregularity of the
ground. An abandoned coffee-patch lies near the house.

The quality of most of the land is inferior, and unfavorably located for
cultivation with a plough; and I felt satisfied at sight that this place
was not adapted for our purposes. Being very tired I declined eating any
thing for supper, and retired to my quarters, where I found a very
comfortable bed arranged with musqueto-netting. The single bed,
corresponding very much in proportion to our hospital bunks, is the most
frequent in this country; and it is very rare that a large double bed is
found, except for family use where there are children.

There is one view of this fazenda which might be worthy of attention,
and though evidently unsuited to the location of a number of families,
there is a large extent of territory which is well adapted to grazing,
and a cattle range can be extended to public lands lying adjacent. There
is a considerable portion of elevated campo land, independent of the
level plain described as lowland, which would doubtless suit very well
for sheep and goats, as some of it is quite rugged, and has clumps of
trees, which would serve as places of retreat in the heat of the day.
Any one who would desire to combine stock-raising with a farming
business, might do it here advantageously; and from the proximity to the
market of São Paulo, there would be a ready disposition of all that
could be grown.


                                          THURSDAY, _November 23, 1865_.

A nephew of Senor Bento, who resides upon the Fazenda Bananal, joined me
this morning in riding across the mountain, to take a survey of the
forest land lying upon the slope and crest of this elevation. I saw a
few places in which corn was growing very satisfactorily, and after
reaching the top of the ridge, found a portion of the ground whose
configuration was more favorable for cultivation, though most of it lay
quite irregularly.

There was nothing worthy of further notice save a most beautiful lake,
far above the surrounding country, enclosed by hillocks, and having a
dense forest lying upon one side. It is fed by a number of small rills,
and perhaps also by internal springs, while there is but one outlet,
forming a large stream, which has a most picturesque cascade at a short
distance from the lake. This placid lake, which is known as “tanque
grande,” with the bold stream leading from it into the forest, and then
dashing down a rocky gorge, presents the most attractive feature of this
fazenda. The lake is said to be very deep, and contains a large number
of excellent fish. It might become very profitable as a place for the
culture of fish, to supply the market of São Paulo, as the outlet could
be so guarded by an iron grating, or a network of sipo, as to prevent
the escape of even small fish over the fall, and the fish could be
caught with the hook or other modes of capture on a larger scale.

If the gentlemen and ladies of the city should desire recreation, they
could find no more pleasant resort than this lago bonneto upon the
mountain top, and close the day with a fish-fry in the adjoining grove.

This attractive spot is evidently not appreciated as a specimen of the
beauties of natural scenery, and few, perhaps, excepting those rude and
unlettered inhabitants of this mountain region, know of its existence.
Should a traveller in Switzerland encounter such a rare combination of
beauties as is presented here, it would be sketched with the greatest
interest, and portrayed in the most enthusiastic terms by the lover of
nature. It is a quiet, clear sheet of water, about three hundred yards
in length, and about two hundred yards in width, with the outlet as
stated, running into a dense forest. The lands around it have been
cleared up for cultivation, and run down with a gentle slope on all
sides to the margin. The vandal hand which cut away the primeval growth
around this lovely spot should be held responsible for constructing a
terraced walk around it, and beautifying it with the choicest flowers
and evergreens, so as to compensate for the loss it has sustained in
removing the grove.

Though I could not praise the soil, I expatiated in all the variety of
terms my vocabulary would afford, upon this exquisite water-scene, yet
my matter-of-fact companion met my eulogy by the grave and business-like
interrogation, whether I was sufficiently pleased with my examination to
buy the fazenda, to which I was forced to give a negative reply.

As I returned to the city with Senor Bento, we stopped at the house of
his brother, Senor Bonifacio, at the Fraguezia Conceicão, and there
enjoyed a bait of jaboticabas from the trees that grew in a field near
by. While in the house, a servant was ordered to do something in which
café and laranga (meaning coffee and orange) was heard, and supposing
these articles were being ordered for us, I excused myself from taking
coffee in the best Portuguese available, when lo, it turned out that the
words simply referred to securing our horses in the grove near the trees
of the above name. Thus it is that an imperfect knowledge of language
gets one into difficulties on every hand.

The sun being very hot, I was kindly supplied with an umbrella by a
gentleman who joined us in the ride from this place to the city, and
though he was thus left unprotected, there was no alternative but to
accept it. These people are frequently very self-sacrificing in their
courtesies to others, and though it has been said to me that their
civilities are only the outward show of politeness, I must say to their
credit, that nowhere can there be found more of the reality of
accommodation, and hearty readiness in rendering any required aid, than
among the people of this province.

Upon reaching São Paulo, I found that our baggage had been sent to the
office of the diligence to be forwarded to Santos, and tickets were
secured for us to proceed to-morrow morning.


                                            FRIDAY, _November 24, 1865_.

At a late hour last night, one of General Wood’s party, Mr. W. C.
Kernan, reached the hotel Europa from Ybicaba, where he had been left
sick. He accompanied me this morning to the diligence station, and upon
my statement that Mr. Street would arrange for his passage, a seat was
procured for him.

I found upon entering the diligence that Dom Pinto, Junr., was a
passenger, and he introduced me to Mrs. Burton, the wife of the British
Consul at Santos. She requested me to take charge of her on the trip,
which was done, and upon arrival a servant was engaged to carry her
baggage to the hotel, but my proffer of attendance was declined, as she
said that she desired to give her husband a little surprise, and would
prefer to go up alone.

She remarked that Captain Burton would be happy to see me at any time,
when I replied that it would afford me pleasure to meet him if he should
find it convenient to call upon me.

Our passage in the diligence was made in the shortest possible time,
over the smooth road, to the top of the serra, but a tedious descent was
caused by some derangement of the stop-block attached to the wheel of
the diligence, and we had rather a slow boat from Cubitão to the city of
Santos, where we arrived at 2 o’clock P. M.

After proceeding a short distance from the landing, I met a young man
employed in the store of Mr. W. J. Wright, and accompanied him to the
office, where I found the same cordial greeting and tender of
hospitality which had met me in passing here previously. His intelligent
and dignified lady subsequently received me with much kindness also.

Their two interesting little boys, Billy and Henry, recollected my
former visit, and seemed likewise to welcome my return, so that I really
felt very much at ease in my social relations to this pleasant family.
After dinner we walked out, together with the children, to a cool
fountain a short distance from the residence, and there enjoyed a
sociable conversation, sitting upon the green sward.

I accepted the invitation of Mr. Wright to accompany him and Mrs. Wright
to the theatre at night, to hear the bell-ringers and tumbler melodists.
An intelligent young Brazilian gentleman, Dom Augusto T. Coimbra, went
with us from the house, but I soon found that there was another
attraction in the building for him more potent than the skill of the
performers.

After entering the box with Mr. and Mrs. Wright, I bowed to General
Wood, who was in the pit with the rest of the party, and upon his rising
and bowing to me, he was invited by Mr. Wright to come into the box.

He came, accompanied by Mr. De Vi Valdi, United States consul at this
port, who not being in good odor with my friend, Wright, was not
presented to me, and after a short time he requested General Wood to
introduce him. After the first performance, they returned to the seat
with Dom Pinto, Junr., the General and his party being his guests for
the evening.

The success of the bell-ringing was complete, and I was particularly
impressed with the execution of a piece called Orpheus. But I did not
find so much to admire in the musical tones of the friction upon the
different glasses, though great skill and art were displayed by the
operator.

Though there was here a collection of the best people of the city, there
were but few fine-looking young ladies.


                                          SATURDAY, _November 25, 1865_.

We were introduced to Captain Rudolf Julio de Balbi, inspector of the
port (Guerdamor) of Santos, who speaks English, and went round the
different parts of the custom-house with the party. This is a large
building, which was formerly a nunnery, and though rather rude in its
structure, answers all the objects of the government at this port, where
but a small business is done, and yet with the prospect of doing an
extensive trade at a future day. This gentleman took us in his boat to
the arsenal landing, where the commander of the port joined us, and some
of the party getting into his boat with the United States consul, we all
went aboard of the Santa Maria. After paying this mark of respect to
General W. W. W. Wood, these gentlemen took leave of us and returned to
the shore.

Four hundred soldiers destined for the seat of war were embarked upon
the steamer, and yet did not interfere with the cabin passengers. All
were well-dressed, and seemed in fine spirits for the most part. A few,
who looked rather pensive and lachrymose at parting with friends, were
rallied by the others with much glee.

The drummer of the band, who was a mulatto, with spectacles, made a
speech, in which there seemed to be a profusion of patriotism, and
closing with vivas for the cause, and everybody and every thing
associated with this regiment, he drew forth the huzzas of all around
him. Music was next in order, and he belabored his huge bass drum with
as much energy as he had delivered his speech.

One of the officers afterwards rose, and shouting at the top of his
voice gave a series of vivas that were responded to by huzzas from the
troops, and the whites, mulattoes and negroes all seemed alike
exhilarated.

This doubtless changed the current of feeling with many who had left
their homes reluctantly, and especially was it salutary for those who
had been dragged forcibly into the service. Military duty appeals to the
noblest elements of man’s nature, but when the endearments of family and
the comforts of home are contrasted with the love of country and the
trials of the campaign, there are many in every country who are disposed
to shrink from the call to arms; and the scenes which have been
witnessed of men being brought up with chains around their necks, is
only an aggravated exhibition of what occurs in most countries engaged
in war. Those who won’t do their duty voluntarily must be required to do
it under coercion.

When we got upon the sea many of the officers and men became sea-sick,
and with the usual want of sympathy on such occasions I observed one
poor fellow, who was casting his dinner over the rail, had two or three
on each side of him, who were jestingly going through the motions to
taunt him for his weakness of stomach. There were women accompanying
some of the men, but in what capacity is not known, and in some
instances they were sick, with their heads resting against the breasts
of the men, while in others the men were sick, with their heads on the
laps of the women, who sat flat upon the deck. By the way, this is a
very common style of sitting among the common and middle class of women
in Brazil, using simply a piece of thin matting to keep them off the
dirt floor. Upon entering the humbler class of houses you are likely to
see, in a back room, women with only a chemise and petticoat sitting
down in this way at work, who get out of view as soon as possible.


                                            SUNDAY, _November 26, 1865_.

Our steamer entered the harbor of Rio de Janeiro about 7 o’clock this
morning, and at the police station a boat was secured for us and our
baggage, in which we came immediately to the wharf and thence to the
Exchange Hotel. The total expense of boating and porterage for four of
us was but $2.00; which was less than I had to pay for myself in getting
from the steamer to the hotel in New York on my way out. The porterage
allowed negroes in Rio by those who understand the terms upon which they
can be secured, is very small, not usually exceeding five cents for a
trunk or box to be carried several squares. But when these darkies find
a man who does not speak the language, and consequently unacquainted
with the usages of the place, they make up for their shortcomings on
other occasions. When a boat or a porter is wanted, the best plan is to
fix your price, and call out for some one who will serve you at the
proposed rate, when the competition soon secures the service from some
of the number that are present at these places on all occasions.

Our apartments at the Exchange Hotel are very comfortable and even
elegant, with all the usual appliances of a well-furnished room. General
Wood and Doctor Warne are quartered together, while Mr. Brown and myself
are in another apartment. We have a sitting-room, bed-room, and
dressing-room, for which the charge is $2.50 per day; while the more
tasteful accommodations of the General and Doctor Warne are valued at
$4.00 per day. These charges are independent of our fare, which is paid
for according to what is ordered at each meal. We are upon the same
floor with the eating-saloon and quite convenient.

Having a letter of introduction from Mr. Bennaton to Mr. Carlos Nathan,
I accompanied General Wood and Doctor Warne to his establishment, No. 77
Rua São Pedro; when he invited our party to dine with him and his
brother George residing in Botafogo. As he feared there might be some
disappointment in our finding the boat, he despatched a servant to
conduct us at 2 o’clock to the proper place. The trip through the bay
was very pleasant, and our escort being a New York negro he spoke
fluently of the various interesting scenes, but still did not consider
Rio a very desirable residence for free gentlemen of color. Arriving at
Botafogo, it was found a most delightful, retired nook, with neatness
and taste displayed in the houses and grounds, surrounding a small arm
of the sea that extends between the mountain cliffs on either side. This
is, perhaps, the most pleasant portion of the suburbs of the city for a
private residence; and every consideration of economy, health, and
retirement contributes to render this locality desirable.

The wives of these two brothers are sisters, of the family name of
Goodman, from New Orleans, and speak French quite as readily as English.
Their houses are near each other, and Mr. Brown and myself dined with
Mr. Carlos Nathan, while the other two dined with Mr. George Nathan.

Mr. Carlos Nathan is manifesting more interest in the emigration from
the Southern States than any of the former residents of the United
States who live in Rio; and indeed these two brothers are the only men
here who were in the South at the opening of the war, they having left
to avoid the consequences that seemed inevitable from the enemy’s
movements.


                                            MONDAY, _November 27, 1865_.

While at breakfast this morning, I met with Messrs. S. W. Brooks, Major
Robert Meriwether, D. H. A. Shaw, and Dr. Davidson, who arrived
yesterday in the steam packet North American from the United States.
They have come to examine the country in reference to business and as a
location for families. Dr. Shaw and Major Meriwether are the regular
agents of a colonization society in Edgefield District, South Carolina,
and bring with them an appointment embodying instructions from the
president of the association.

As the representatives of other parties they have adopted the proper
course in having authenticated credentials, which may be exhibited to
those here who may be called upon to render them assistance in exploring
the country. The matter-of-fact bearing on the part of these gentlemen
will impress the officials of Brazil very favorably, and I trust their
investigations may be conducted in a way to lead to most satisfactory
results.

Dr. Davidson is here to act for some friends in Texas, while Mr. Brooks
represents a company of machinists and operatives who desire to
establish a foundry and machine-shop for working iron in all its various
forms.

All these gentlemen impress me with the earnestness of their purposes
and their business intentions, so that I hope to co-operate with them in
the farther examination of the country; and will render them any
assistance in my power to promote their object. The same facilities will
doubtless be afforded by the government to them that have been extended
to others.

Having failed yesterday to find any one at No. 92 Rua Direita, I called
upon Mr. G. N. Davis this morning and received a letter from my wife,
which, however, was written in August, and served very little to relieve
the suspense felt in regard to my family, as great anxiety is manifested
in regard to the future conduct of the negroes in the country.

This is the only information from any of my friends since leaving on the
26th of June; and I am quite anxious to know the present disposition of
those who are expected to act with us in the projected move to Brazil.

I delivered a letter of introduction to-day to Mr. Joseph Bennaton, No.
125 Rua Direita, from his nephew, Mr. Newton Bennaton; whereupon he
manifested a cheerful readiness to promote my wishes, and extended an
invitation to sojourn at his house while I remained in the city. I
thanked him for his proffered hospitality, but stated to him that
circumstances made it desirable for me to stay at the hotel, where
persons could be seen on business. His invitation to visit his family
and take dinner to-morrow afternoon was however accepted.

A copy of the handbook for emigrants to Brazil, arranged by Dom Galvão,
was received from him to-day by the hand of his secretary. In this, he
has compiled the laws and public enactments of the empire of Brazil
bearing upon the relations of foreigners in becoming residents of the
country, with the regulations heretofore in force pertaining to
colonization. It is expected that important modifications of the laws of
Brazil will be made in regard to the anticipated emigration of people
from the south of the United States, yet nothing has yet been definitely
determined on by the authorities.


                                           TUESDAY, _November 28, 1865_.

Upon calling this morning at the residence of the Minister of
Agriculture, he was absent, and a note was left for him stating that I
would return at ten o’clock to-morrow morning with other gentlemen from
the Southern States.

Dr. Shaw, Dr. Davidson and Mr. Brooks called with me to-day upon Dom
Galvão, and had a conference with him in regard to the emigration
movement. He was so kind as to send his secretary, Mr. Mello, with us to
one of the public offices to procure maps of the lower provinces of
Brazil. This latter gentleman speaks English as well as Dom Galvão, and
I accepted his invitation to go out to-morrow afternoon and make the
acquaintance of his mother’s family.

I proceeded with Mr. Bennaton at four o’clock in the little steamer to
his residence in Caju, and found the scenery in that precinct quite
attractive, and his residence very pleasant. His wife is a German lady,
much younger than himself, and they have three interesting little
children. She is a fine performer on the piano and sings admirably, but
as her pieces were mostly Italian I could not fully appreciate her
music.

After dinner I joined them in a visit to Mr. Fox, who resides in an
elegant house upon the hill, which is surrounded by grounds laid out in
fine taste, and having the additional attraction of most excellent
grapes, imported from the United States. He drew my attention to the
fact of his dwelling being much damaged by an insect which destroys the
texture of the wood and leaves the part without support. I supposed it
to be the same that had been seen at the house of Mr. Blackford, where
the interior of the wood was reduced to a mere powder, with a thin
exterior layer.

This injury to the texture of the wood may escape observation unless
there is a special examination of the particular part, as the
perforations by which these insects enter the outer layer are very
small, and all the fine sawdust made by their operations remains within
this outer shell, that is not thicker in the specimen seen than coarse
white paper.

Any iron rod, or even wooden pole, thrust against a piece of timber
affected in this way would cause it to yield and fall into a hole, so
that the damage might become in this way apparent when their presence
was suspected in a house. But most of the heavy timbers being concealed,
this mode of testing is impracticable, and they give way, as the first
sign of the mischief going on within.

Mr. Fox has lived in Brazil for forty years, and conducted a large and
successful mercantile business, by which he has realized a handsome
competency, and has now retired. He is an Englishman, and has retained
his nationality, raising his British flag on important occasions upon a
flag-staff which stands in his yard. His views are expressed unfavorably
to domesticating in Brazil, and yet his example of spending most of his
life here, with a prospect of continuing here for the present, seems
contradictory to his opinion.

He has not married, and yet has a senhora in his house, who stands in
that relation which induces many in this country to dispense with a
wife.

He is now perhaps over sixty years old, and this buxom-looking,
dark-skinned woman is probably something over thirty-five, officiating
at his table and discharging the other duties of housekeeper.


                                         WEDNESDAY, _November 29, 1865_.

Being awakened at daylight, I accompanied Mr. Bennaton in a row-boat to
the city. He had business which required his presence at his store very
early, and as I wished to confer with the other gentlemen at the hotel
in regard to matters for the attention of the Minister of Agriculture,
it was very desirable to both that this early move be made.

Major Meriwether, Dr. Shaw, Dr. Davidson, and Mr. Brooks went with me at
10 o’clock A. M. to the residence of the minister, and after presenting
these gentlemen I explained through the secretary, acting as
interpreter, the nature of their mission. The papers embodying the
authority under which they acted were submitted to the consideration of
the minister by Major Meriwether and Dr. Shaw.

Upon learning that these latter two gentlemen desired to visit the
province of São Paulo, the minister stated that they would be afforded
the same facilities which had been received by others, and that they
could likewise visit other provinces if they were not satisfied after
examining this.

When it was intimated to the minister that I had not seen all the parts
of the province of São Paulo which I desired to examine, and that it
would be mutually agreeable to visit such sections of country with these
gentlemen, he said this arrangement would be entirely satisfactory.

It was understood that Senor Ernesto D. Street would take charge of the
voyage to Conceicão and Cananea, while arrangements would be made for
Mr. Bennaton to proceed with us to other points in the interior.

Dr. Davidson, wishing to go to the Bay of Paranagua, had similar
facilities afforded for his passage and subsequent examination of the
adjacent country.

Mr. Brooks explained his object in coming here from the United States,
to ascertain certain facts as to the location of iron-works in Rio de
Janeiro; and that this being the centre of trade, it was not thought
advisable to go elsewhere. He stated that all the appliances were in
readiness to be brought here and put into operation should his
information warrant the move, but as yet he had not learned those data
upon which a conclusion could be based.

I adverted to the probable advantages of some location which could make
the ore of Epanema available, and supply not only all the domestic and
agricultural implements for the province of São Paulo and others
adjoining, but eventually make railroad iron for the extension of the
line in progress from Santos. The minister thought a situation might be
secured with this view that would prove very favorable to business. But
Mr. Brooks not being inclined at present to extend his observations and
inquiries beyond the city of Rio, the minister assured him of his desire
to encourage the erection of such works, and that any assistance which
the government could consistently render would be extended to this
enterprise.

The minister stated that there was no tax on capital employed in the
various manufacturing operations, and that no duty is exacted upon such
implements as emigrants may import upon their arrival in the country for
their use.

Professional men, as doctors and lawyers, are required to undergo an
examination upon coming here for the practice of their respective
callings.

Negroes are not admitted into Brazil from other countries unless
free-born, and even should they be citizens of the latter after being in
slavery, it does not authorize them to be received here.

Regarding this a matter of much moment to those whose negroes would be
willing to come with them to this country, I urged the importance of
some modification of the existing regulations so as to permit those
presenting free-papers from the United States government to enter
Brazil. But the minister informed us that it was a provision of the
constitution based upon international laws, that could not be altered
without a reference to the other powers concerned, and, moreover, that
this element would not be a very desirable addition to the population of
the country.

There are certainly some aspects of the matter which make it of
questionable propriety to admit this particular class of free negroes in
a country where slavery exists, and the influence of these freedmen upon
other free negroes and upon slaves in Brazil might tend to bring about
similar scenes to those which have been enacted in the process of
emancipation in the United States.

On the other hand, this skilled labor in the culture of cotton and in
the working of machinery of various kinds, would be of much importance
to the progress of agriculture and the arts. The negro from the Southern
States could give negroes here a practical illustration in the use of
the plow, which would be worth more to Brazil than all the treatises on
agriculture which are likely to be written for twenty years; and in this
respect a few of these negroes would prove very advantageous.

It is evident, however, that Brazil regards the institution of slavery
as precarious, and we see already in the public prints allusions to
future emancipation, and measures suggested for its gradual
accomplishment, which are intended to prepare the public mind for this
event at no very distant day. Where this question is discussed among a
people whose interests are so largely involved in slavery as in this
country, it may be taken for granted that there is a sentiment of
opposition to it which will by piecemeal attain the end in view. The
overturning of slavery by the result of the war in the United States is
simply a sequence of abolitionism which has been at work for a series of
years in shaping the policy of the government; and it is found that the
same element is working industriously and too surely, for the final
consummation and realization of their views in the securing of equal
rights and free suffrage to the negro. I do not intend to convey the
idea that the institution of slavery cannot be discussed with safety to
the institution, for I hold that it rests upon a basis that is tenable
in a moral, political, and social point of view; yet the presentation of
this subject in the public prints indicates that there are many others
besides those who write holding similar doctrines.

The English element of the population in this country is antagonistic to
slavery, and is quietly instilling this principle, not simply by the
expression of opinions, but in some instances by aiding in the
liberation of slaves through contributions of funds for the purchase of
freedom, and contracting for the service of the party for a certain
period.

The minister informed us that no military service is exacted from
residents of Brazil who are not citizens, and that only the service of
home-guards is required from such foreigners as are naturalized.

No practicable measure has been devised for lessening the price of
private lands which may be desirable for emigrants; but public lands
will be put at the minimum price of twenty-two cents per acre, with the
privilege of five years to pay for it.[21]

I informed his excellency that no formal report of my observations, up
to this time, had been prepared, from the fact that it was my wish to
make a further examination of the country, and that a final report,
covering all, would be rendered when this tour was concluded.

On our way back to the hotel, the extensive and admirably arranged
tannery (cortuma) of Mello & Co., in São Christovão, was visited by the
party; and we were quite surprised to find so much taste and neatness
displayed in the surroundings of the place. The structures are not
simply substantial, but manifesting an architectural skill and
perfection of arrangement that is not often found in buildings for
similar purposes anywhere. The grounds are laid out artistically, and
ornamented with shrubbery and flowers, so as really to make this place
of business a pleasant resort.

The interior is provided with all the appliances for treating the hides,
from packing them down, while fresh, in salt, to dressing the leather
and finishing it off for use. There is a mill run by steam for grinding
the bark and the leaves of the manque bravo and the manque manse, which
furnish the astringent for making the tan ooze.

The small tree affording these materials grows very abundantly in the
swampy lands near the coast in various portions of this country, and the
principle of tannin is so strong in the leaves of the manque manse, that
it makes a black dye which is indelible. There are, also, other trees
growing in the forests here which furnish barks that are used for
tanning; one of which has been pointed out to me, and is found upon the
slopes of the serras in great profusion.

The vessels used in this establishment are huge reservoirs, made after
the style of a half-barrel, with a diameter of five feet and a depth of
three feet, into which a decoction of the astringents is conveyed, and
in this the hides are deposited for a time, and afterwards laid down
with astringents in the vats, to undergo the tanning process.

There are three sets of vats: the fresh water vats for soaking the
recent hides, the liming vats, and the tanning vats. These are all laid
in cement, and of course retaining all the fluids that are placed in
them. The dimensions are about six feet long, five feet deep, and four
feet wide. The fresh water is supplied by a system of pipes, and
regulated according to the demand.

The refuse angles of the hides, and also those portions of the skin
about the feet, with the hoofs, are converted into glue, and every thing
is economized with the greatest care and neatness, preventing any bad
smell.

The average period allowed for the action of the astringents upon the
hides is six months; and I was informed that some three thousand (3,000)
hides are taken out monthly, giving thus an annual yield of thirty-six
thousand (36,000) skins tanned here.

Notwithstanding the apparent system of this extensive establishment, I
understand that it has not proved very profitable to the proprietors;
and it may be that there is more style than efficiency in its
management.

There are three other large tanneries in the suburbs of the city; and,
from the specimens of leather examined, the art certainly seems to have
attained a high degree of advancement. Whether the materials ordinarily
used here are preferable to red oak bark, I have no means of
determining. In some sections, the logwood is a native growth, and it is
employed for tanning the heavy sole leather; but this is not regarded
the best quality of leather for any domestic use, and is generally
shipped to other parts where heavy shoes are more in demand.

Subsequent to the examination of the tannery, Dr. Shaw and myself
visited the butchering establishment, where the greatest portion of the
beef eaten in this little world of a city is slaughtered, and the
appliances are co-extensive with the immense demand. Some of the
machinery for securing and killing the animals would afford an
interesting item for description; but, having no taste for this species
of mechanism, I will pass it over with the simple mention, that it is
evidently well adapted to the object in view. The huge carcases that
were suspended in the building were of the well-defined varieties of
Pharaoh’s cattle, and it occurred to me that I should like to make my
_choice_ here of what I should eat.

There is no general meat-market in Rio as in most large cities; but
there are houses in all the different streets who deal in the flesh of
different kinds, thus supplying all demands. One of the noticeable
features connected with this butchering establishment is the immense
collection of the largest horns that have ever been produced in any
country. It would have afforded quite curious information to have
measured one of these tremendous developments; and, most assuredly, the
slang phrase of taking a horn never had its origin from the use of those
having such proportions as were exhibited here. The cattle from the
lower provinces of Brazil, that furnish many of the beeves for this
market, are very large, and have the most disproportionably large horns
that it has fallen to my lot to see upon the head of any animal, being,
thus, of huge size.

All the juices are extracted from the bones of the animals that may be
left on hand, or returned here for this purpose, and soap is produced
from it, while the substance of the bone is reduced to a charcoal that
commands a good price.

The entrails of the beeves are also cleaned of every portion of the
tallow, and they are afterwards used for making soap on the premises.

The negro women engaged in this operation of washing the intestines
present quite a graphic scene. Instead of using vessels of water, they
carry a lot of these filthy things into a canal of water which is
located between the butchering-house and the boiling establishment, and
the water being considerably above knee-deep, it behooves them to have
their clothing protected from getting wet at the expense of denuding
their entire lower extremities. Their skirts are tucked about their
waists, with a fold passing round between the thighs, which thus gives a
display of nature unadorned.

According to appointment, Mr. Mello called at my room this afternoon,
and Dr. Shaw, Major Meriwether, Mr. Brown and myself joined him, to make
a visit to the Botanical Garden, and also to call at his mother’s house
on the way.

Taking an outside seat on the hack, I enjoyed a good view of all the
scenery along the drive of five miles, and found the many fine
improvements and the beauties of nature on the mountain sides very
attractive. At several points the road lay close by the water’s edge,
and in one locality the wall which had been erected as a barrier for the
waves had been undermined, and had tumbled down, with a considerable
caving in of the land, reducing our passage to a narrow way. The lofty
peak of the Corcovado was towering above us, and the little rivulets of
water coursing down its sides glittered in the rays of the descending
sun, while here and there along its base were neat cottages or palatial
dwellings of those who sought refuge from the din and confusion as well
as the heat of the crowded city.

Going forward, we reached the garden, with its grand and gorgeous
colonnade of majestic palm trees, which is doubtless the most perfect
type of quiet dignity and simple beauty that the world can present. Much
has been done in rendering portions of these grounds artistically
attractive, and yet the beauties of art are overshadowed by the greater
beauty of nature presented in the forest that has been left upon the
back of the garden. From this hillside there is a stream of water
tumbling down in artificial cascades, and running on to form a beautiful
lake upon the plain below, all fringed with green.

This retired spot has been selected by the authorities for a collection
of rare specimens of trees, fruits and flowers, being hence styled the
Botanical Garden. If any one desires to study in a small compass, many
varieties of rarities, it may be done here advantageously, without a
guide, as the names of most of the unusual fruits are attached to the
trees by a metal card. The almond, the clove and the cinnamon tree are
among this interesting assortment.

The greatest taste has been displayed in laying out these extensive
grounds, and they have been most elaborately supplied with attractions,
making it quite a recreation to stroll leisurely and quietly through the
extended walks. No one should go to Rio without visiting this place, and
a hack takes persons from Rua Direita directly to the gate.

Upon our return we stopped with Senor Mello, and found his mother and
three sisters presenting more of the characteristics of our people than
is usual among the ladies of this country. Though none of them spoke
English, I found that my small acquisition in Portuguese availed to
communicate with them to a limited extent, and the kind disposition
manifested compensated for the lack of language to express their good
will towards us.

Another brother of the young ladies was also present who speaks English,
and with the aid of the two as interpreters, all got on very pleasantly
with our party during the call.

A nice repast, with beer, wine and brandy, was served in the
dining-room, and none of us having any difficulty in comprehending this
phase of the entertainment, all were prepared to appreciate it. With the
best wishes of the old lady, we took our leave of the household.


                                          THURSDAY, _November 30, 1865_.

Going this morning to the office of Mr. C. Nathan for some letters he
proposed to furnish for our visit to Ignape and Cananea, he sent a young
man with us to the post-office to assist in examining the lists, and to
make inquiries for letters. None however were found, and I must be
resigned to the failure of letters by the last packet from the United
States.

Upon returning, Lieutenant Fiske, formerly connected with the
Confederate Navy, called to learn something of my observations upon the
country, and finding that he had concluded to return to the United
States, I presented no consideration calculated to change his
determination, nor did I feel disposed to develop my plans to him.

Mr. Malone came in for a short conference, in which he expressed his
decision to remain in the country with his family. He and his lady had
at one time a female school in Memphis, Tennessee, and they will make a
pleasant addition to the group of settlers wherever they may locate.

Shortly after these gentlemen left, Senor Street entered and informed me
that he was authorized by the Minister of Agriculture to accompany
myself, Dr. Shaw, and Major Meriwether to Conceicão and Cananea, and
that all would be arranged for us to go aboard of the Santa Maria
to-morrow.

Having been informed that it would be agreeable to one of the ministers
who comes from Minas to see us, Mr. Mello had undertaken to arrange for
a meeting, but he returned with the statement that his excellency would
be in conference with the other ministers and the Emperor to-day, so
that he could not see us for the present. As we leave early to-morrow,
our meeting with him must be deferred.

But Dr. Shaw has concluded to make a memorandum of matters desirable to
be known respecting that province, and get Mr. Mello to communicate with
this honorable gentleman from Minas, so that we may be informed at a
future day. One of the points of most interest to me is the facilities
for hiring negroes which are said to be afforded in some parts of Minas,
and it is desirable to know upon what terms they will allow them to go
to other sections of Brazil, for a term of years.

All the afternoon was spent in exploring the city of Rio with Dr. Shaw
and Major Meriwether, for the purchase of travelling-trunks, spurs, and
a thermometer; whereas, an application to some of our friends for the
number and street in which these things could be found would have cost
us but little trouble. Let others profit by this suggestion and save
time and labor.

Though I had many personal matters of business to look after, these
gentlemen desired my assistance, as they were totally unacquainted with
the language, and there being no other person to whom I could refer
them, it devolved upon me to accompany them. We spent a great deal of
time unnecessarily, and walked ourselves completely down.

Being very tired when I returned to my room at night, I lay down upon a
lounge to rest and did not awake until 11 o’clock. I then went down to
search for a cup of coffee, but found every place in the vicinity was
closed; and for once it occurred to me that coffee-houses might very
appropriately keep late hours. Most of the eating and drinking
establishments are shut up at 10 o’clock P. M. My fatigue and drowsy
mood found refuge in my bed for the rest of the night.


                                             FRIDAY, _December 1, 1865_.

Having a reserved stock of clothing in a chest at No. 92 Rua Direita, I
selected this morning such articles as would be requisite for the
projected tour, and proceeded to pack my baggage at a late hour, so that
it was done in great haste. Thus, some things of much importance were
left in the room, but as Mr. Brown retains the same quarters, I trust he
may find them and deliver them to Mr. Carlos Nathan. If a word of
caution can avail to induce others to pack up all baggage on the night
previous to an anticipated journey, it will save them of all confusion
and enable them to employ the last moments before starting much more
profitably.

Dr. Shaw, Major Meriwether, and myself being in readiness, negroes were
employed to carry our trunks upon their heads to the wharf, and we then
availed ourselves of a row-boat to proceed to the Santa Maria, which lay
out some distance in the bay. The three persons, with all baggage, were
taken for one dollar by previous contract, as I have found that to be
the best mode of doing business with these boatmen.

Our friend Mr. Mello was found on the steamer, having accompanied some
friends aboard. He introduced us to Dr. Fogg, an American dentist, who
has resided in Rio for twenty years and realized a handsome income from
his business.

He retains his citizenship in the United States, as do most of those who
have come from there to this country, and none of them, so far as I have
heard, encourage our people to remove with their families to Brazil. We
place our own construction upon their statements, and prefer to think
and act independent of their advice.


                                           SATURDAY, _December 2, 1865_.

The arrangements upon the Santa Maria all proved very satisfactory to
Dr. Shaw and Major Meriwether; and the fare was in accordance with the
usual good table of this boat. A state-room with four berths was set
apart for Mr. Street in conjunction with us, making it a pleasant little
family party. Of course we enjoyed a refreshing sleep, and rose to find
ourselves approaching the city of Santos. Landing at 8 o’clock A. M., I
proceeded immediately to see my friend Mr. Wright in regard to the
measures for visiting the lands near Conceicão. Finding his breakfast at
hand I joined him and his family, and he afterwards came with me to see
the vicar (vigairo) of this district, who was acquainted with persons in
that section.

He manifested much interest in the proposed visit, and said that there
was a person in town from there with whom he would confer as to our
trip. The aspect of affairs was not very promising for an early move, as
this individual could not go to-day and did not know whether it would be
practicable to go to-morrow.

In the mean time the other two gentlemen, Dr. Shaw and Major Meriwether,
were quartered at the Hotel Milan, and I was a guest of Mr. Wright,
while Mr. Street proceeded to São Paulo to arrange with the President
for the means of defraying expenses on this voyage.

I dined at the house of Mr. Wright’s father-in-law, this being his
birthday, and that also of the Emperor, which made it the occasion for
quite a feast of good things.

After concluding the ceremonies of the table the members of the family
all shook hands with each other, this being a custom of constant
observance among them after dinner, even on ordinary occasions.[22]

Learning that there was a site for buildings with some lands attached,
upon the seaside, which were offered for sale, Mr. Wright went with us
to see the place. He supplied me with a horse, and the other two
gentlemen were supplied from the livery stable. A young man was sent by
the owner to show us the premises, and I observed that he was riding a
mare, which is the first time that one has been observed in service
anywhere in the country. In the stockgrowing region they are confined to
trading, and there seems to be an impression that they are not suited
for the saddle or for pack service, as the valuation of mares is much
below that of horses.

After riding five miles through the hot sun we found a location which
might, with a large outlay for improvements, become a very nice
residence for a family. It is at a point where the serra approaches the
water of the ocean, and thus getting the full benefit of the sea-breeze.
The property includes a portion of the level low land with a portion of
the elevated land, and there is a small clear stream of water running
down the slope, which has been used in former days for the machinery of
a sugar-mill. From the antiquated look of the relics, we might readily
suppose that this was the identical establishment erected by Martin
Affonso in 1533, to work the cane grown in this region from specimens
procured in the island of Madeira. There is now only left the stone
basement of the old building, but the stream still runs fresh and pure
water that might again be used for some mechanical purpose, or for other
domestic uses of a family.


                                             SUNDAY, _December 3, 1865_.

We made a commencement of this day in the right direction, by going to
church before breakfast, but it was not with any reverential intentions.
We ascended the high hill, Monteserrate, to take a view of the large
building there located, and to enjoy the wide extended panorama to be
seen all around us. One old horse, that by some legerdemain had
accomplished the ascent of this lofty pinnacle, and a few goats, as full
of frolic and mischief as these animals usually are, constituted the
companions to the rather dreary-looking inmates of the church building.
It is only upon extraordinary occasions that this church is brought into
requisition, and during my former visit to the city there was an
illumination of the windows at night that presented a brilliant and
captivating view from the plain below. We found the ascent of the steep
and narrow winding way very fatiguing, which rendered a rest quite
acceptable upon reaching the summit, and it was well calculated to
recall the resting-place of the dove, from which this is named.

Though it was Sunday morning, and though the service was for the church,
several negroes were employed in carrying baskets of brick upon their
heads, from the base to the top of this mountain, and moved up without
any great inconvenience under their heavy burdens. How they undergo such
labor with such weights upon their heads is a mystery to me, but it
seems to be the favorite mode of transportation by the negroes here and
at Rio de Janeiro.

If these darkies, however, are strong in proportion to the aroma of
their persons, they ought to accomplish wonders, for the scent was
overpowering as they passed us.

Dr. Shaw and Major Meriwether joined me to-day at dinner with Mr.
Wright, and concurred in my very favorable estimate of his accomplished
and modest wife.

It was ascertained to-day from Senor Urcezina Antonio Ferreira that
arrangements would be effected for us to leave here to-morrow morning in
company with him, to make the voyage to Conceicão. But from the various
modifications of the plan and the changes of time for leaving, I feel
considerable misgivings about setting out with this man, and have
requested Mr. Wright to let Mr. Clinton W. Jackson, the book-keeper in
his store, accompany us on this trip as interpreter. He has consented to
this, and upon returning to the hotel with a view to a final
understanding, our escort not meeting us at the hour fixed, Clinton was
under the necessity of going in search of him. He brought him round in a
short time, with an explanation of the delay, and we were told that
every thing was arranged for us to leave at five o’clock next morning in
a diligence to proceed to São Vincente. This is a distance of eight
miles, and thence other means are provided.

Being impressed here with the difficulty of procuring means of
transportation, I telegraphed Senor Street, and wrote a note to Mr.
Bennaton to arrange animals for proceeding on the 9th instant from São
Paulo.


                                             MONDAY, _December 4, 1865_.

We made an early start from Santos in the diligence, accompanied by
Senor Ferreira, and reached São Vincente in good time for breakfast.

Here was the first settlement of civilized man in this region, Martin
Affonso having landed at the port near by, in 1532, and as a preliminary
step erected a fort to protect his people from the Indians who then held
possession of the country. There were various tribes of Indians
throughout the country, and through the intervention of João Ramalho, a
Portuguese who had been left upon this coast by a vessel early in that
century, a portion of these tribes became friendly to the newcomers, and
the town of São Vincente was established. A church and a school soon
sprung up here, and there was a prospect of an increasing population by
accessions from the mother country. But the hostile tribes of Indians
made frequent incursions, in which great outrages were committed, and
the sense of insecurity prevented any material advancement in the place.
The obstruction of the harbor ultimately by sand prevented the entrance
of vessels, and the present site of Santos became the port, and business
was transferred to that place.

The villa of São Vincente has perhaps been stationary for over a hundred
years as regards population; and it seems to be the residence of a lazy,
listless gang of very ordinary people. There is a large church and a
number of houses, perhaps in all, fifty, which form one short street.
The inn at which we got breakfast and a few shops do all the business.

Taking our carpet-bags in our hands we set out at 8 o’clock for the
canoe-landing, and crossed the Bertioga to the main land in about half
an hour. Again we proceeded on foot, with a rain falling that drenched
us thoroughly; and the ground being flat was soon covered everywhere
with water, so that walking was attended with much difficulty. It was
expected that a walk of three miles would take us to the beach, where a
cart was to be in waiting. But not finding any conveyance it became
necessary to travel on foot four miles farther. Here, however, we had
the firm sandy beach, and apart from the rain, the operation of walking
was not disagreeable.

At length the covered cart or diligence of this Senor Ferreira was
reached; and all hands being in good keeping for a lunch, the eatables
provided for us at Santos were drawn forth. With a cup of hot coffee
prepared by the inmates of the house where we stopped, and the bread
stuffed with sausages, all were refreshed for the progress in the cart.
This turnout for the transportation of persons along the beach is quite
a novelty, both in mode of construction and in its being recently built
for this express line. The wheels are made of hard wood and have no iron
tire; but the axles are of iron, and the mechanism by which the front
connects with the body is quite too complicated for description. The
body is panelled, with seats extending along each side within, after the
omnibus style. The cover is of cotton cloth which has been smeared with
oil, but not serving to exclude water, as we had ample opportunity to
testify. The three mules moved off at a fair gait under the frequent
lashings of our German postilion; but after travelling eight or ten
miles they became very dull, and their pace was so much slackened,
notwithstanding the German’s antidote, that the progress was suspended
for the jaded animals to recuperate their energies.

In the mean time Major Meriwether and I proceeded on foot, so as to
relieve the mules of our weight when they might resume the advance. It
was raining some and blowing considerably, but fortunately the wind came
upon our backs so as to assist our progress. Any one who has ever been
upon a sea-beach with a strong wind can fully appreciate the importance
of having it to favor your course. With this firm level beach and a very
light vehicle, with sails attached, it would have been quite practicable
to keep ahead of these slow movers. Indeed the idea of a windmill
attached to the wheels of a car upon a railway might be made available
for running even against the wind. The cogs upon a trunnel head might be
so adjusted as to work upon the cogs on the axles, giving them
progressive motion; though the wheel of revolution by the wind should be
turned to front or rear or to either side. If this suggestion could be
applied to the stern-wheel of a small propeller, might it not be used to
advantage in some circumstances? We know that windmills are used to draw
water, and why not for turning a wheel in water in like manner?

This thought is original and perhaps novel; though it may have very
little practical merit, let some one try the experiment and report the
result, as the outlay for materials will be but small.

After walking four or five miles we found upon the shore a boat-shelter
with a thatched roof, under which lay a large canoe. As this afforded
some protection from the rain and wind, it was thought best to stop here
and rest a while. A mulatto resident of the coast passed by our
resting-place and said it was but two leagues (eight miles) farther to
the village; but feeling inclined now to avail ourselves of the cart, we
were not in a hurry to move forward. Major Meriwether observed a mulatto
girl at some distance indulging her curiosity by looking at us, and
supposing there must be a residence near at hand I rose and started
towards her, when she left precipitately at a full run. Upon proceeding
in the direction of her retreat I came upon the house or rather the
shelter where the family resided, and asked for oranges and bananas, but
was told that none were to be had in these parts. The only thing seen
about the premises that could afford subsistence was a few stalks of
mandioca; and the interior of the establishment displayed a meagreness
of every thing that could contribute to comfort.

I learn that these people living along the coast depend chiefly upon
fish for a living, and consequently they don’t trouble themselves much
in cultivating the earth. Such things as are produced spontaneously or
with little labor afford a scanty addition to their supplies from the
water, and they care for nothing beside. One of these fellows had been
engaged to carry our luggage before reaching the station where we took
the cart, and he seemed nimble on the foot, with sufficient endurance,
but this job would doubtless satisfy him for a week.

Being rested we set out afoot again, leaving a notice upon the sand, “We
proceed,” and after walking two miles further, the cart was seen far to
the rear. Not intending to concede that we were particularly anxious to
ride, the march was continued until overtaken, which took us at least
one mile more on our way. Thus we travelled on foot not less than
fourteen or fifteen miles, and as the Major carried a considerable
quantity of fat, with new boots that did not yield to the pressure, his
feet were very much excoriated, or, as I put it, he had gum-boils on his
heels.

The mules still made very slow progress, and it began to be a matter of
concern whether they would take us to our destination; but a while after
dark our escort announced that we were approaching the place, with the
suggestion that a portion of the party should get out, and thus lighten
the load through the heavy sand after leaving the beach. Upon halting
opposite the store of our companion, several rockets illumined the dark
regions above us, and reverberated in the stillness of this retired
settlement, to signalize our arrival at Conceicão. After considerable
delay we were shown to a house having nothing but bedsteads to cheer our
vision, and told to make ourselves at home. A bottle of gin was the only
relief to the wet, cold and hungry travellers, and as none of us had any
particular fondness for this beverage, it was touched very lightly. I
did not hesitate to ask for a fire, nor did I scruple subsequently to
urge a more ample supply of fuel. But it was built upon an elevated
scaffold, in a small room without a chimney, so that it was difficult to
get any of the warmth of the fire, and the smoke pervaded every corner
of the apartment, so that it was almost intolerable.

After so long a time we were served with coffee, and the remnants of our
day’s lunch, which seemed to indicate that the resources of our chaperon
were rather slim. But we were still further impressed with this fact
when their flagmats and a single spread upon the hard boards of the
bedsteads were provided for our lodging. We certainly had bed and board
combined in this establishment, and a harder lot I never encountered in
all my rough-and-tumble progress through the world.

A servant was directed to report to us for supplying any wants we might
make known, but we were so nearly in want of every thing that it would
have been an endless undertaking to have specified those things
requisite for our comfort, so we determined that whatever a night may
bring forth will be seen with the light of another day, and waited for
something to turn up.

The reception afforded here by Senor Urcezina Antonio Ferreira differs
so entirely from the good cheer of a Brazilian welcome, such as I have
been accustomed to receive during my tour in the interior, that I have
thought it proper to make a record of the details as an exception to the
usual hospitable treatment extended to me by the people of this country.

This man is not without means, and though he has a family residence in
the villa, this unoccupied house has been set apart for our
accommodation, that we might not be disturbed by the children, who are
represented as dirty little brats.


                                            TUESDAY, _December 5, 1865_.

I had resolved and re-resolved as I turned from side to side upon my
hard support for the night, that upon the first indications of light I
would assume the erect position, and my companion in affliction, Dr.
Shaw, complained aloud most bitterly, insisting that he could not remain
in this position until daylight. Our neighbors, Major Meriwether and Mr.
Jackson, who bunked together, murmured in like manner audibly of their
hard lot. After all of us had risen and dressed, a servant came to
inform us that in the first place coffee would be prepared for us, and
within two or three hours breakfast might be expected.

Under these circumstances I proposed a visit to the convent which stands
out in bold relief upon an elevated hill. As the morning was cloudy our
view was circumscribed, but sufficient to show that the plain of low
land upon which Conceicão stands extends to a considerable distance, and
is limited by the serra on all sides excepting next to the ocean.

The old building gives indications of decay in many parts, while in
others repairs are progressing to fit it for the approaching festa on
the 8th instant. This festival is superintended by Colonel Albuquerque,
of Santos, who has been elected as the Festeiro, and will have to expend
over a thousand dollars in the preparations for this huge folly.

We next called upon the Roman Catholic priest of this place, with a
letter of introduction from the vicar at Santos. He was found in an
uninviting apartment, and received us with that dry courtesy which makes
one feel that it is better to go away as soon as civility will permit.

Having disposed of a very substantial breakfast, we waited until 12
o’clock for the tide to assist us in ascending the Rio Conceicão, and
set out with Senor Ferreira in a canoe, made after the style of the
Mississippi dug-out. With a supply of farina and boiled jerked-beef to
meet our wants for subsistence, and some matting to keep us from contact
with ground at night, as well as to set upon in the canoe, we were
propelled by three able-bodied mulattoes, who used the paddles as if
they were trained to this service upon the water.

Upon embarking, we observed that the mouth of the river was very
shallow, but we were told by Senor Ferreira that at high tide a small
schooner could enter, and that he had a vessel which came in to load and
unload. There is a narrow neck of land separating the river from the
ocean, through which an artificial channel might be opened without a
great deal of labor, giving a much better entrance than across the
present rocky bar of the outlet to the sea. Should the resources of the
country warrant this proceeding, it looks as if it would be entirely
practicable. After passing the bar the river is deep, and well adapted
to navigation for eight or ten miles, up to the mouth of the Rio Prata,
and thence the last-named is said to be navigable for twelve miles.

The main channel of the Rio Conceicão is not fitted for navigation above
the mouth of this river, and but for the increase of water by the recent
rains, our canoe could not have ascended more than a few miles beyond
this point. Below, however, this river presents a fine body of water,
and is for the most part from ten to fifteen feet deep.

After ascending about twelve miles it began to rain, and going some
three miles further we stopped for the night at a rude shanty occupied
by a woman and five children. One son and one daughter were nearly
grown, but the whole presented a scene of slovenliness and abject misery
which made us realize that our lot was cast in even a worse place than
the night previous. But this time there was no alternative, and we took
it in the true spirit of wayfarers and explorers.

After eating pretty heartily of our cold victuals with hot coffee, I
indulged my curiosity by going into the end of the house where the
family were clustered around the small fire upon the dirt floor, and saw
in the imperturbable don’t-care expression of the woman that no
situation in life is so debased but that it affords satisfaction. While
that filthy creature sat on the ground smoking her pipe, with a few
small fish in a pan and a little sour and stinking farina in another
vessel as the only provision for the wants of her household, she
doubtless had less concern for the future than many who are surrounded
by the comforts of life. The idleness and the niggardliness of this
class of people here[23] presents a most despicable view of life, and
the worst feature of all is, that they seem entirely reconciled to this
mode of living. I felt a constant apprehension of vermin while in this
shanty, and my only consolation was, that “life as it is” could be seen
and studied in a phase that was not often presented for my observation.

When we were ready for sleep sundry doors and benches were brought into
use for spreading our mats; and, Dr. Shaw taking a place with me, the
irregularities of the door proved worse than last night.


                                          WEDNESDAY, _December 6, 1865_.

After a night long to be remembered in the annals of rancho lodging, we
were glad to make an early rise, and all sung out with one accord, let
us go away, “vamos embora! vamos embora!” Our escort insisted that we
should remain until some coffee was prepared, and a pigeon, shot by
Major Meriwether on yesterday, being boiled at the same time, we enjoyed
a taste of it with some crackers, which constituted a very dainty
repast.

In the mean time one of the boys of the family was presented to Dr. Shaw
for prescription, and viewing his state as the result of the
impoverished state of the blood, he directed that some vinegar should be
put into a bottle with nails, and that he take fifteen drops of this
fluid three times a day. In the absence of other remedies this was a
good expedient, and could not perhaps be improved if the whole materia
medica were at hand.

The older son, who was nearly grown, hoping for some improvement of his
sanguiferous system, also applied to the Doctor for the exercise of his
skill.

On bringing him up Mr. Jackson, who was acting as interpreter,
suggested, that as the other was to take the vinegar, this fellow might
perhaps derive benefit from taking the nails, and he urged this more
especially as he was complaining of a stiff neck, that might be modified
by swallowing a few of these large iron spikes. The Doctor, however,
thought that a double dose of the vinegar would suffice, with the use of
a plunge bath and good scrubbing every morning. This latter clause might
have been recommended as a prophylactic to the whole family, with the
free use of soap, &c.

Getting into our dug-out the expedition was continued up the river, and,
after ascending five or six miles, the stream became shallow and very
swift in its course from the serra, which was now very near. Our canoe
was stopped at a flat, broad sandy beach, having large pebbles
intermixed with stones at one extremity, and we availed ourselves of the
latter to erect a small monument to the folly of the personage who
accompanied us on this voyage. He had, in compliance with our request to
see the lands suited for agricultural purposes, transported us upon
water to a point from which there was no egress, even on foot, and, in
the mean time, he was industriously occupied in delineating upon the
sand the course of the river, and its tributaries, with the crests of
the serras intervening, by which he undertook to illustrate the
desirableness of the lands for the settlement of our people. After
concluding his comments upon this sketch he manifested great anxiety to
know how we were pleased with the country. To this I returned the rather
equivocal answer, that all were satisfied with his drawing and
explanations, and were ready to return in the canoe to Conceicão.

In our descent of the river we stopped at one of the four settlements on
the margin, and a woman in great trepidation commenced hallooing, in a
tremulous voice, João! João! Efforts were made to quiet her fears by
Senor Ferreira, and to convince her that our mission was one entirely of
a pacific nature, but she did not seem satisfied until the man João came
to the house, and then another girl came out also to see the curious
strangers.

Here was seen perhaps one of the best samples of the lands of this
section, it being immediately at the foot of the serra, and thus
receiving the deposits of decayed vegetable matter and portions of soil
that are washed from its sides by the rains. Vegetation was quite
vigorous, and the ground that was intended for the growth of a crop was
preoccupied to a great extent with weeds and shrubbery, indicating a
good soil, but a want of industry and a want of the proper information
for its cultivation. We were shown a specimen of the sugar-cane growing
in the midst of rubbish from the fallen timber, and choked by a growth
of grass which still showed the adaptation for this crop, and all were
of the impression that, with judicious management, the cane would yield
profitably in this land.

The other articles which were planted, corn, beans, and sweet potatoes,
were growing under great disadvantages, but gave signs of sufficient
fertility in the soil to warrant better results. Upon inquiry as to the
growth of cotton, we were shown two stalks that had sprung up among the
brush, which gave very little promise of a yield, and no inference could
be drawn from such a specimen.

Some coffee trees of three years growth were seen upon this ground, but
their appearance was unfavorable, and it is most likely this crop would
prove unprofitable in this sea-coast region.

The soil of the serra being mixed with that of the flat land in this
particular locality, gives better results than could be obtained from
either taken separately, and it would doubtless make a good return for
labor bestowed in transferring soil from these slopes to the damp flat
land below.

It is due to the man João and his two sisters, to state that they were
neat and clean in their dress, and presented rather more of a genteel
appearance than is seen among the lower class of people in this country.
With their decent bearing, it was a matter of surprise that no more
skill or industry was manifested in the culture of the small piece of
land which was planted.

We got one of these women to prepare coffee for us, and with the remnant
of our cold victuals made a very respectable breakfast. Some of the
party had partaken so freely of sugar-cane, that it became a subject of
discussion as to the bill for damages that might be brought against the
consumers of the products of this man’s farm.

After descending two miles further, we stopped at a farm of Senor
Ferreira, where there is a building for a residence, including the
machinery for a rice-mill. Here we saw corn growing tolerably well, and
also rice and sugar-cane of fair quality; but the cultivation of the
land showed but little more care than at the other place. It is evident
that this property, which he desires to sell, has induced him to confine
his arrangements to an examination of the few points worthy of notice
along this river. But we saw enough here to convince us that the country
is not adapted to our purposes.

Mr. Jackson bought at this house two otter skins for fifty cents each,
the boy declining to take the price until we got some distance from the
house, when he came running after us with the skins, asking for the
money.

In going down the river several shots were fired with pistols at
water-birds, a ligarto, &c., but there was no execution done by any of
the party.

At one point on the margin of the river we saw several parties preparing
to embark in canoes, with stores of various kinds, intended to serve
them in visiting the villa during the approaching festival.

Following after us were two canoes, in each of which a woman was
assisting to paddle while standing up, and seemed to be accustomed to
this kind of service. Already a number of people from the surrounding
country have arrived with their supplies, bringing even their fuel in
the canoes, and they live in freedom from all restraint, after camp
style, during their sojourn at the place. These festas are religious
ceremonies, without much show of solemnity, in which mass is said, and
is followed by sky-rockets and fire-works of various kinds. Then comes
the banquet by the festeiro, and such other festivities as the occasion
may suggest, or the people desire for recreation.

After reaching the landing at Conceicão we assisted in drawing the huge
canoe from the water upon rollers of wood, and thus taking it upon the
beach beyond the ordinary rise of the water. Here lay quite a number of
similar vessels of these people awaiting their further movements upon
the water.

We brought down with us a supply of the palmetto, which is prepared by
stripping off the outer layer, until the central tender and white stem
alone remains. This is then chipped off from the end by a knife, and
boiled or stewed with a little fresh meat, and seasoned with pepper and
salt, making one of the best vegetables I have eaten in Brazil. The
portion used is about a yard long, presenting a green exterior, and
found at the top of the trunk of the palmetto, (a species of palm,) with
the leaves spreading out at its upper extremity. There are the sweet and
bitter, of which the latter is particularly good for the stomach.


                                           THURSDAY, _December 7, 1865_.

It being understood that the cart was to be ready for us to start upon
our return at six o’clock this morning, we rose and got a cup of coffee
shortly after five o’clock a. m. But, on repairing to the cart, it was
found that the mules were not even caught from the open common in which
they had been grazing, and that it would be necessary to find them
before they could be harnessed for the trip.

As Senor Ferreira did not make his appearance, we sent a messenger for
him, and in the mean time, the head man of the trio who paddled the
canoe up the river presented his account. He was informed that this
would be settled, with any other claims which might be rendered, through
Senor Urcezino Antonio Ferreira, for services received by our party
during this trip.

Up to this time, we had no means of knowing our true relations to this
personage, and were doubtful whether to consider ourselves the guests of
a gentleman who had taken charge of us at the request of his friend the
vicar at Santos, or were to regard this man as simply a business agent
to procure what might be required on our account.

This question was summarily solved by the presentation of an account, by
him, for all accommodations afforded us, as follows:

            Carriage from Santos to São Vincente      $4 00
            Passage in canoes from São Vincente        2 00
            Eating breakfast at São Vincente           2 00
            Lunch and porterage on the way             3 00
            Boating up and down river                  5 00
            Eating at Conceicão                        5 00
            Transportation on the beach               20 00
                                                     ——————
                                                 $41 00[24]

In addition to this, the servants at the house were paid two dollars and
fifty cents for their attention; and thus it is hoped and believed that
all obligations are cancelled to this Senor Urcezino Antonio Ferreira,
of Conceicão.

It is proper to remark, that the cart and mules used for our
transportation on the beach were the property of this individual, and
that the turn out was kept for the purpose of making money out of the
passengers on this route along the beach.

Colonel Albuquerque, having arrived during the night, called to see us
while awaiting the slow movements of our postilion; and I was pleased to
find that he spoke some English, as did each of his three sons, who had
gone a voyage on the Onward, with Captain Clark, who married their
sister. The Colonel, thinking of our needs during the day, sent us a box
containing a chicken, some Dutch cheese, biscuits, grapes, and a bottle
of excellent port wine, which afforded a good repast on the beach.
Though our acquaintance was slight, and he was merely sojourning here
temporarily with his family, yet he extended that consideration to us
which has characterized the bearing of all Brazilian gentlemen
heretofore.

The Catholic priest had called to see us at our quarters, and gave us a
passing call this morning, when proceeding on some professional duty in
the vicinity of our rendezvous.

There is a large church besides the convent in this place. The buildings
are chiefly in one straight row, and a few for a short distance on the
opposite side, with a sorry and woe-be-gone population not exceeding
twenty-five or thirty families, doing but little business.

The mules being at length in readiness we made a start with a team of
four at 9 o’clock A. M., but only proceeded a short distance when the
double-tree in front was broken, and it became necessary to proceed with
but three mules. On reaching the beach the lead mule became unmanageable
and ran into the sea, taking the others and cart so far that upon the
return of the waves from the tide we were likely to go afloat, thus
facilitating our transportation rather more than was desirable.

This trouble was corrected for the future by placing a man, who
accompanied the driver, astride of the front mule, but the great
difficulty of slow movement was not so easily overcome, though he was
supplied with a pair of our spurs, and both these drivers plied the rod
most vigorously upon the animals.

I counted the number of blows inflicted upon one of these beasts within
five minutes at two different periods, and they averaged ten to the
minute; which for five hours, the term of the trip, would make the round
sum of three thousand lashes received by this mule.

Our postilions were German sailors and both spoke some English, so that
we could communicate with them. After an interruption in our voyage by
some derangement of the rigging, they both got into position for
advancing, and Alberta Deyer, who was on the driver’s seat, called out
to Lewis Thompson, who rode the front mule, “Now take your course south
by half west, and make sail—vamos.” With these two high-pressure
oscillating engines we made about three knots an hour; and for a time
all of us were quite amused at the extraordinary proceedings of these
fellows, but eventually it became a most serious matter, and nothing
could urge our lazy and jaded beasts out of a walk. I remonstrated with
the drivers not to inflict further punishment upon the animals, as the
blood was already to be seen in various parts, not only from the spurs
but from the heavy blows of the poles used by these athletic sons of the
ocean.

At length we reached the point where the road turns from the beach, and
it was questionable whether the mules could go any further; but it
continued to rain, and it was desirable to remain under cover as long as
any progress could be made in the cart.

We had gone however a very short distance when some mismanagement of our
helmsman brought the wheels on one side almost into a very deep ditch,
and the mule next to the ditch, with the instinct of self-preservation,
which is characteristic of that animal, leaped with its fore feet over
the tongue. There was imminent danger of being upset, and all hurried
out, with our baggage in our hands, determined to proceed on foot. A
bottle of rum had been got on the way, to counteract the soaking rain
upon the drivers, and giving them another drink they were left to
exercise their sailors’ ingenuity to avert shipwreck of their craft.

Walking nearly three miles we crossed the Bertioga again in a canoe, and
upon reaching São Vincente[25] hired horses for one dollar and a half
each, to ride eight miles, into Santos. It was very dark, and some of
the road very rough, but all got through safely.

Dr. Shaw and Major Meriwether stopped at the hotel, while I assisted Mr.
Jackson in taking the horses to a pasture at Mr. Wright’s; and getting
supper we congratulated ourselves that the trip to Conceicão was ended.


                                             FRIDAY, _December 8, 1865_.

Having spent the night with my friend Wright, I arose early and went to
the Hotel Milan, where my comrades were quartered, finding Senor Street
had returned from São Paulo. My telegram was received by him, but he
stated that it would be impracticable for him to proceed through the
country, and that Mr. N. Bennaton had gone to Rio de Janeiro, with the
expectation of returning on the 11th inst. A letter was found here from
him, proposing that we wait until he could join us, to make the tour
from São Paulo through the country. But in view of all the facts we
concluded to avail ourselves of the boat expected daily to proceed to
Cananea; and after examining the lands adjacent to the Ribeira de
Ignape, to return to this point, and go thence to São Paulo, to make the
trip to the country lying between the Tieté river and the serra to the
eastward.

We made a reconnoissance this morning of a lot of land in the city
belonging to Commendador Ferreira, which he proposes to sell. It extends
from the water at the lime-factory, in a solid oblong body, lying
between two streets.

The measurement made by stepping was five hundred and fifty (550) yards
in length and three hundred and fifteen (315) yards in breadth; with a
portion of irregular shape not measured, extending to the water. For
this it is understood that his price is ten thousand (10,000) dollars.

There is another portion of vacant land belonging to the same gentleman
located between that described and the water street on the front of the
city.

This measures four hundred (400) yards in length, two hundred and thirty
(230) yards wide at one end, and one hundred (100) yards or thereabouts
in width, at the other end. The breadth corresponds very nearly to the
greater measurement through half of the lot, and then slopes to that of
the smaller, making it somewhat irregular in shape. This has a water
front with a street, which is bounded by a rock wall as a barrier to the
tide, and here is afforded very desirable sites for building.

Should he be willing to include this with the sale of the other, it
would make a very valuable property for those who may wish a city
investment.

That Santos will improve greatly in a few years is confidently
anticipated, and lands within the city limits, such as these, must
increase in value.

Mr. Wright accompanied us in visiting the lime-factory already mentioned
as located at the edge of the water at the northern portion of the city;
in which the shells and deposits of a calcareous nature from the island
are worked up into a beautiful white lime. There is a small steam-engine
for working the ventilating apparatus, which acts upon the furnace, and
the fuel being placed beneath the mass of materials a heat is generated
which transforms the shell into the gray crude lime.

After this process is completed, the mass is removed to the open chamber
of the building, and parcel by parcel is sprinkled with water and placed
in a pile, which developes warmth so great that the hand cannot bear it,
thus producing the lime in ordinary use under the name of slacked lime.
It presents a fine aspect, with all the other indications of a good
quality of this article. There is no limestone near this place, and
hence the shell is made available for lime.

We also visited the tannery located in the suburbs of the city near the
margin of the coast on the north. It is by no means so neat as the one
described in Rio de Janeiro, and the want of any systematic disposition
of the refuse parts of the hides leaves them to create a stench about
the place which attracts a number of buzzards.

The articles used chiefly for astringents in the tanning process are the
same as observed in Rio; the leaf and bark of the manque manse and the
manque bravo, which grow promiscuously over the extensive tidewater
lowlands near this city. There is in connection with this tannery a rude
lime-factory, which produces from the burning of shell the lime required
for use at this place.

In examining the specimens of sole leather that were piled up under an
open shed, the process of tanning seemed to be very thorough; and though
there is not that care and attention bestowed which would insure the
best results, yet this business has proved profitable to the proprietor.
He has a small steamboat which is used for bringing in his materials for
tanning, his raw-hides from the city, and in delivering his leather for
shipment, or any other service connected with his operations. This
diminutive craft makes regular trips also to Cubitão, connecting with
the diligence line to São Paulo; and is frequently hired for excursions,
thus making a nice little income, besides serving all the purposes of
transportation for the tannery.

Mr. Wright tried to procure this small steamer for our party to visit
Perique to-morrow, but found that it was engaged, and that it could not
take us until Sunday.

Dr. Shaw and Major Meriwether were invited by Mr. Wright to dine at his
house to-day, it being the birthday of his elder son, Billy. His
father-in-law, mother-in-law, and sister-in-law were also present on the
occasion; and we were all favorably impressed and very much pleased with
the performance on the piano by Mrs. Wright and her sister. Most of our
Southern songs are played by Mrs. Wright, but really there are so few of
them in keeping with the result of our struggle, that we feel but little
interest in hearing them now.

In going out upon the street after dark with Mr. Wright, we observed
there were some exercises at the Roman Catholic church; and upon
entering, we found that a number of persons, principally females, were
kneeling for mass; while vocal and instrumental music added interest to
the scene. It was a day of some festival.

As we returned we met on the pavement at the entrance of a house Senor
Manoel Pinto Soares; and soon afterwards his wife Donna Flora came down
prepared for a walk. As they were going in the same direction with us,
Mr. Wright devolved it upon me to escort the lady, and upon going
forward with her, Senor Manoel suggested that she take my arm, whereupon
I tendered her this assistance, which was accepted by her.

Though I could command but a meagre supply of the Portuguese language
for conversation, I arranged my words so as to be understood, and her
remarks were also comprehended, so that there was but little
embarrassment. My observation has now satisfied me that ladies in
refined society receive the same kind of attention from gentlemen as is
customary with us.


                                           SATURDAY, _December 9, 1865_.

Dr. Shaw and Major Meriwether spent the night with me at Mr. Wright’s,
and a cup of coffee being served to us very early we set out before 6
o’clock to the canoe of Senor Antonio Franco in company with Senor
Street, for a trip across the water.

Mr. Wright’s double-barrelled fine English gun was taken along by the
Major, and he had an opportunity of shooting at an alligator, (jacaré,)
but it made its escape into the water.

Upon approaching the site of Senor Bastos, the canoe entered a sort of
canal leading up into the land, and we then disembarked and walked a few
hundred yards over a level, low, marshy plain to the house. Rice was
seen upon one side presenting a healthy aspect; while on the other was a
garden-spot that has received more than the usual attention, yet the
vegetables did not look flourishing.

Vegetables do not usually grow well with us in any kind of soil without
some artificial stimulus; and the art of manuring is almost unknown to
these people, so that it is rare to see good vegetables.

The sugar-cane was also growing at a short distance from our path, but
is a small variety with short joints, having a red or purple aspect,
that is cultivated only for cachaça, (rum.) I infer from the specimen
seen that the land has not the requisite fertility to produce the best
cane.

The house upon this place is a large one-story building, having the rice
and sugar apparatus under the same roof, worked by water-power. Most of
the territory is mountainous and of little fertility; but the flat lands
with proper management might be rendered productive and profitable.


                                            SUNDAY, _December 10, 1865_.

I acquiesced in the arrangement for taking a voyage in the steamer
to-day, though it was the Sabbath.

We visited the extensive establishment known here as Perique, in company
with the proprietor, Senor Valencia, some twenty miles distant from the
city of Santos.

The houses and grounds have been recently overhauled and renovated,
presenting an attractive combination of extensive buildings, with a
beautiful beach and delightful sea-breeze. The dwelling has eighteen
rooms, besides a large dining-saloon and ample corridors, presenting an
air of comfort that is rarely met with anywhere. There are also
outhouses suited for the quarters of laborers and for all other purposes
required on a fazenda.

We saw a portion of the land that would be well adapted to the
cultivation of any of the staples, but this was not of large extent; and
a great portion of it is low and marshy, so as not to suit any thing but
rice. The entire territory is represented as containing sixteen square
miles, and I should not think that more than two square miles is
sufficiently fertile to repay for cultivation, a part being unfitted for
use by reason of the serras and a part by the marsh.

This place and its present proprietor have been rendered somewhat famous
by a hostile collision on his part with the English marines under
Captain Croft, in 1850; who landed here under orders to suppress the
slave-trade conducted through this port of entry.

Senor Valencia collected thirty-seven negroes and thirteen whites, with
guns, and after being fired upon, they poured a volley into the ranks of
the marines, which caused them to return to their vessel. He states that
this body of troops had previously gone to another improved place on
this land and burned several houses; and that he supposed it to be their
purpose to burn these large buildings on the beach. He determined to
resist their further destruction of his property, and secreting this
force on the route by which he supposed the marines would approach the
house, an elevated position was taken by him where he could watch their
movements.

It was understood by his men that, upon a signal from him with a
cow-horn, they were to use their weapons against the invaders. As the
marines approached their position, one of the negroes becoming curious
to see what was going on, rose up to look and was immediately shot in
the head by the marines; whereupon, a blast from the horn induced them
to return the fire promptly and with effect. One man was known to have
been killed, and the signs of blood upon the spot and along the line of
retreat gave evidence of the fire of his domestic guard.

Senor Valencia was subsequently demanded by the English government, and
had to leave the country to avoid capture. He has spent most of the time
since in Montevideo, until his interests there being ruined by the
operations of the war with Paraguay, induced him to apply to the Emperor
of Brazil for permission to return. He came back in June of this year,
finding every thing about this place in disorder, and has endeavored to
bring it again in workings condition with a view to dispose of it. It
affords fine facilities for fishing, and might be made profitable in
supplying the Santos market.


                                            MONDAY, _December 11, 1865_.

We visited the factory of brick and tile on the main land beyond the
bay, two miles distant from the city. It is the most complete, in all
appliances, which I have seen anywhere, having a steam-engine to work up
the mortar preparatory to moulding, and having a patent compressing
apparatus that gives a neat smooth surface to the brick while it imparts
solidity and firmness to the entire mass. The furnaces are constructed
of stone and faced with fireproof brick, having a general finish which
is rarely seen in such establishments.

I was particularly impressed with the simplicity of the tile-making. The
mortar was first spread upon a flat board by the hand of a stout negro
fellow, and then another passed a scraper over this, to remove the
superfluous layer, when a third turned it upon the convex mould which
gives it the proper shape, and bears it to a shelf, upon which it
remains until sufficiently dry to be put into the furnace for the action
of the fire.

In addition to the above-named articles there are also manufactured here
various household wares, such as water tanks, or jars of very large size
for keeping in public or private houses, earthen bottles shaped like
demijohns, bowls, stew-pans, and which are used in place of metal
vessels very generally.

The material used is a combination of the clay taken from the hillside
with the mud of the low land, and while neither separately would be well
adapted to the purpose, this mixture makes an excellent mortar for
moulding and burning. There is not a large quantity of brick or tile on
hand, but some of all the varieties of style and size, showing the
capacity of the establishment to meet any demand.

Upon inquiring the price of the brick I was told that for the smaller
size, nine inches by three inches, the cost was twenty-five dollars per
thousand; for the larger, twelve inches by four inches, thirty dollars
per thousand; and for flooring brick ten inches square, fifty dollars
per thousand. The last-named is a broad, square, thin tile brick with a
figure impressed upon it, which is decorative in fitting up the basement
of houses or paving fancy walks in a yard or open court. It is not very
likely that the above prices will encourage the builders of houses to
change from their old style of mud walls; and really if some of our
people, who know how to manufacture brick upon an economical scale,
would come here and enter largely into the business, it must prove very
profitable to them, while it would be a great advantage to those
erecting houses in Santos.

The compressing machines are of English make, under the patent of
Clayton & Co., and are worked by hand. The steam-engine for working up
the mortar is from the works of Maler & Co., located at Rio de Janeiro.

There is a canal connecting the factory with the bay which greatly
facilitates transportation. A tank or well in the yard under shelter
affords a supply of water for mixing the mortar, while there is a
fountain of pure and cool water coming from the mountain side through a
pipe into a large marble receiver in the open air.

Captain Buhlaw arrived in the city to-day from Cananea, and represents
the lands of superior quality, while the transportation by water is
available on all sides of the territory. He states that the soil is dark
and the trees are large, without much undergrowth of shrubbery.


                                           TUESDAY, _December 12, 1865_.

Upon the arrival of the Santa Maria from Rio de Janeiro I went aboard
with Captain Balbi, who invited me to take a seat in his boat, and found
Mr. Bennaton there with instructions from the Minister of Agriculture to
accompany us on our tour from São Paulo across the country. He stated
that he could go now, and might not be able to accompany us if we
delayed to make the trip to Cananea by water. I asked him if he thought
it would be practicable to reach the country lying upon the tributaries
of the Ribeira de Ignape and belonging to Cananea by going across from
São Paulo upon mules; when he gave it as his opinion that we could make
the trip, and said that he would advise us to adopt that course.

As this concurred with the view I had when the telegram was sent to
Senor Street at São Paulo, and the boat upon which we expected to
proceed might be still further delayed, I advised Dr. Shaw and Major
Meriwether that it would be better to pursue the course above indicated.
It was accordingly arranged that Mr. Bennaton would go on to São Paulo
to-day and that we should go to-morrow, it being understood with Senor
Street that we would meet him at Xiririca, on the Ribeira de Ignape, so
that he might assist us in the examination of the country. As Senor
Street had already gone to the trouble to arrange for our visit by
steamer, he was not satisfied that we should abandon that plan, but with
the advice of Mr. Bennaton in favor of the other course, it was adopted.

Our baggage was sent by the transportation wagon of the diligence line
forthwith, and we were notified that seats would be provided for us on a
train of cars going out this afternoon to Moije station, where the cars
stop for the night.

Mr. Henderson, the gentlemanly superintendent, gave us a pass over the
road free of charge, and we were informed that the same would be
extended on returning. We found a number of officials connected with the
road on the train with us; also my friend, Mr. D. H. Sampson, and the
Rev. A. G. Simonton, brother-in-law of Rev. A. L. Blackford.

After a ride of twelve miles we stopped at a public house kept by a
German, who gave us an excellent dinner, with all the varieties of
drinks usual in the city hotels.

Beds were spread upon the floor for the accommodation of our party, and
we found every thing very comfortable.

We found here upon arrival Senor Martino, with a friend connected with
the law school in São Paulo. They had come down with their guns and
dogs, expecting to have a hunt in this vicinity; but it has been raining
so constantly as to prevent the sport. Both of these gentlemen have been
students of law for more than the usual term, but their fondness for the
woods with their dogs and guns has taken more of their attention than
their books. Senor Martino has now, however, graduated, and has
consequently the title of Dom, as every one here has who is permitted to
practise law. He has promised to send me a supply of indigo seed from
Minas, where he resides and this plant is grown extensively.


                                         WEDNESDAY, _December 13, 1865_.

After breakfasting some of our party repaired to the clear, cold stream,
where a dam had been thrown up, and enjoyed a plunge bath, which was
quite bracing and salutary.

We were conveyed from the station to the foot of the serra in a light
open car, by a horse. We went in a rapid trot over the smooth parts of
the road, but suddenly we were notified that the engine was meeting us,
when our trella was stopped, and the horse disengaged so as to run it
back and avoid a collision. The engine, however, stopped before reaching
us, and we proceeded to the workshop on foot.

The entire party were next carried up the steep grade on the serra, of
one foot ascent in every ten feet, for one mile and a quarter, by the
action of a stationary engine of one hundred and sixty horse-power. We
then walked a similar distance, a land-slide having interrupted the
running of the inclined plane. Again we were drawn up the third section,
and walked up the fourth, where the track was torn away by the sliding
of the earth.

Much has been done here to overcome the natural difficulties presented
by this serra, but much more has yet to be done before any reliance can
be placed upon this line for transportation of freight, or as a highway
of travel for passengers. Not only must the earth or stone upon which
the track rests be secured against yielding, but the sides of the cuts
in the serra must not be liable to slide, and thus endanger the passage
of trains, or obstruct the road at various points.

There is a double track for one-half of the distance upon each of the
four inclined planes, and a balance car runs down at one end of the huge
wire cable, while the train is drawn up at the other extremity.

By sundry turns of this cable around the rims of large metal wheels
connected with the stationary engines, the friction and resistance is
such as to obviate slipping of the wire cable. This entire force is
brought to bear upon the freighted train in its ascent, while the
descending balance car keeps the cable tight, and exerts some influence
upon the ascending train of cars.

At each of the four stations one of these immense engines, having five
capacious and strong boilers, exerts its power in bringing up the
trains. But all this seems now very much like the lever of Archimedes,
with which he proposed to move the world if he could but secure a
fulcrum. The basis of efficient operation for the road being the
embankment upon which the track rests, it is indispensable that some
plan shall be adopted to render it secure, or the tremendous power of
the machinery can be of no avail.

At the close of our last walk we reached the level where the locomotive
is sufficient to move the train, and after a lunch of cheese, bread and
beer at a vende, (retail shop,) we took our seats in an open car and
whirled along at a rapid rate over the road to São Paulo.

The use of iron stools of a concavo-convex shape as supports for the
rail, instead of wooden cross-ties, is adopted here, but an accident
from the breaking of one leads to the inference that they are unsafe.

There was one point upon the track at which two cars, loaded with dirt,
discharged their cargo with remarkable despatch, by dropping the sides,
that were attached by hinges, and then the negroes used their shovels to
conclude the work.

We had on the train with us Mr. J. J. Auburtin, the general
superintendent of the road; Mr. Henderson, superintendent of the working
operations; Mr. Fox, president engineer; Mr. Hutchins, secretary to
chief engineer; and Mr. Jesters, traffic agent. All the business offices
are in the city of São Paulo, and the chief work-shops are located there
also. The chief engineer of the company resides in England, and has his
representative here looking after the business.

Upon reaching the Hotel da Europa, we met Mr. Bennaton, who informed us
that arrangements were progressing for our trip; but it is most likely
we may be detained several days, and we must practise that Brazilian
virtue, patience.

Calling upon Mr. Blackford and lady during the evening, I found their
house filled with ministers of the gospel, who are here with a view to
organize a Presbytery, to exercise discipline among those who have
become members of the Presbyterian church in this section, and to ordain
a converted Catholic priest, who has been assisting in missionary work.

While the people here profess to be tolerant of other religions, some of
the former enactments in regard to seats in the councils of state, and
in regard to marriage, are calculated to discourage emigration, but it
is expected that these things may be changed ere long.


                                          THURSDAY, _December 14, 1865_.

The indications of delay here are evident, from all that can be learned
to-day, and we feel that suspense which is natural to those earnestly
desiring to accomplish an object.

I accompanied Dr. Shaw and Major Meriwether to purchase an outfit of
water-proof overcoats and leggins, which cost each of them twenty-two
dollars and fifty cents, but they are now well provided against the
rainy season.

This period of almost constant rain is now upon us, and lasts usually
two or three months in this latitude. During the other nine months of
the year, rain falls but seldom in any considerable quantity, and during
June, July, and August, is regarded the dry season of the year. These
being the coolest months, the relations of the wet and dry season to
temperature differs from what is observed in the United States. The
winter with us is usually the period of most rain; but there is not so
marked a difference, as is remarked in Brazil, between the rainy and dry
seasons of the year. I anticipate less inconvenience in travelling from
the rain than would be experienced from the continuous hot sun during
the day; and learning that the mornings are for the most part free from
rain, we can do most of our riding early in the day.

A most important item to the traveller is to have along with him, at all
times, a change of under-clothing, and for this object, a water-proof
valise or satchel is very convenient. In this, his comb, tooth-brush,
and a pair of slippers can also be kept at hand, though he may be
temporarily separated from his baggage.


                                            FRIDAY, _December 15, 1865_.

Mr. Bennaton now thinks that matters will be arranged so that we can
leave day after to-morrow, but while we do not wish to retard any of the
preparations, it is not expected that we will leave until Monday. None
of us approve of travelling on the Sabbath, when it can be avoided.

Mr. Blackford called to see us this evening, and remonstrated warmly
against Sunday travelling, but more especially against setting out on a
business tour upon the Sabbath, when we could so easily wait for another
day. He insisted that no good would come of business done on the
Sabbath, and said if we did not expect to observe the sanctity of the
Sabbath in this country, we had better return at once to our families,
as he felt assured they would not prosper here, without keeping the
Sabbath day holy to the Lord, and observing it as a day of rest from
labor.

Meeting Dom Prates upon the street this afternoon, he informed me that
he has a body of land on the Ribeira de Ignape, of which every alternate
lot will be given to families who will locate on them.


                                          SATURDAY, _December 16, 1865_.

Having arranged to meet Dom Bernardo Gavião this morning, we proceeded
to his office, with Mr. Bennaton as interpreter. Upon inquiring the
terms upon which he would dispose of the whole, or a part of the
extensive territory of Cambuy, he stated that he would take one hundred
and twenty-five thousand ($125,000) dollars for the entire property.
Estimating it at twelve square leagues, the cost will be something over
one ($1) dollar per acre, and believing that there is not over four
square leagues which is well adapted to cultivation, it puts the price
over three dollars an acre for the productive land. He couples the
proposition with an offer to hire two hundred and forty negroes for a
series of years, at the annual rate of twelve thousand five hundred
($12,500) dollars; the first payment to be made at the end of the second
year, and without interest, but subsequent payments at the close of each
year. He informs us that there are one hundred and twenty men, ninety
women, and thirty children. It will be noted that the proportion of men
is large to that of the women, and the proportion of children very
small, which is to be observed in most gangs of negroes in Brazil; the
former owing to larger importations of males from Africa, and the latter
from want of proper care of women and their offspring. These negroes are
to be fed, clothed, and receive medical treatment, at the expense of the
party employing them; while the owner loses the time of disability for
labor, by running away, or, in the event of death, a pro rata reduction
being made.


                                            SUNDAY, _December 17, 1865_.

Desiring some definite information in regard to the missionary
operations of the Presbyterian church in Brazil, the following was
handed to me, for such use as I might think proper.


                                         SÃO PAULO, _16 December, 1865_.

  DR. GASTON:

DEAR FRIEND:—In satisfying your request for information in regard to our
missionary work in Brazil, I am compelled to-day to be very brief.

In August of 1859, the Rev. A. G. Simonton arrived in Rio de Janeiro. In
July of 1860, myself and wife arrived. In May, 1861, Mr. Simonton began
preaching in Portuguese to three or four persons. The number of hearers
slowly increased the first year to twenty-five or thirty.

In December of 1861, the Rev. F. J. C. Schneider arrived in Rio de
Janeiro, destined to labor among the German colonists of this province.
He resides in Rio Claro, (São João de,) and has devoted himself to this
special work, amid many discouragements, and seeing but little fruit as
yet of his labors.

In January of 1862, a church was organized in Rio de Janeiro, when one
American and one Portuguese were received on profession, as the first
fruits of our mission. Our church there now numbers forty-nine members,
nearly all natives and Portuguese, and converts from Romanism. Hundreds
have heard the word of God preached. The present average attendance is
nearly one hundred, and would doubtless be much larger, but from the
difficulty of getting a suitable hall for preaching. During most of the
years of 1861, ’62, ’63 and ’64, preaching was held in English in Rio de
Janeiro.

In October of 1863, I came to São Paulo, to begin a new station in this
city. In March of the present year, 1865, we organized a church here,
receiving as our first fruits six persons on profession, all natives,
and Portuguese, and converts from Romanism. The attendance here ranges
from fifteen to thirty.

In October of 1864, we received on profession to the church in Rio de
Janeiro, O. Senor José Manoel de Conceicão, formerly a priest of the
Roman Catholic church, and vicar of Brotas in this province. He is a man
of fine talents, education, extensive information, and very eloquent. We
expect (D. V.) to ordain him on to-morrow, to the full work of the
gospel ministry. In his former parish of Brotas a church was organized
on the 13th November of the present year, with eleven members, converts
from Romanism. No missionary resides there, and the work has been done
so far by visits from time to time of the persons above-named.

Since 1855, a Scotch physician has been preaching in Rio de Janeiro. The
result is a church, with a membership of more than one hundred, and an
attendance of from two to three hundred.

About a dozen colporteurs are at work in Rio de Janeiro, and in various
parts of the empire, circulating the Bible and other books.

Some seven or eight German ministers are laboring among their countrymen
in various parts.

                                                      Yours, very truly,
                                                      A. L. BLACKFORD.


I am also informed that a Presbytery was organized yesterday, by these
three Presbyterian ministers, to be in communication with the Synod of
Baltimore. Senor Conceicão having preached his trial sermon this
morning, is to be ordained this afternoon. It was delivered at the house
of Mr. Blackford, in the presence of a mixed auditory, of which Dr.
Shaw, Major Meriwether and myself formed a part. As he spoke Portuguese,
I could only gather a few ideas, and the others had to draw upon their
imagination entirely; but, like the deaf man in regard to William C.
Preston, we could say he made the motions well.

Afternoon. Since writing the above, I witnessed the ordination of Senor
José Manoel de Conceicão (formerly a priest of the Roman Catholic
church) as a minister of the gospel in the Presbyterian faith, of the
Protestant church. He was interrogated by the Rev. A. L. Blackford, who
was joined by the Rev. A. G. Simonton, and the Rev. F. J. C. Schneider,
in the laying on of hands, while Senor Conceicão kneeled in their midst.
Mr Simonton then delivered an address, at the close of which Senor
Conceicão spoke with deep feeling and the most humble appreciation of
his new relations.

This event indicates an important epoch in the progress of Protestantism
in this papal land, and the character of the individual, with his
influence among the people, will doubtless have considerable effect upon
the public mind. He has manifested much independence in separating
himself from the associations of Romanism; and his appearance bespeaks
the character of a high-toned, intelligent gentleman.


                                            MONDAY, _December 18, 1865_.

Our trunks were packed and all our baggage arranged for taking our
departure early this morning; but it was found that there were still
wanting two pack-mules and a pack-saddle to equip us for the tour.

Upon the proffer of Dr. Shaw to pay for the pack-saddle, one was
purchased by Mr. Bennaton, at the round figure of thirty ($30.00)
dollars. Our friend Mr. Sampson procured two additional mules, and the
outfit was pronounced complete.

The President of the province having given Mr. Bennaton the requisite
document and funds for proceeding with us, our party left the capital at
half-past two o’clock P. M., after a detention of five days for
preparation.

Mr. J. J. Auburtin, general superintendent of the Santos and São Paulo
railway, accompanies us on the tour as far as Sorocaba, having his own
servant, and also his own riding mules. But it seems that he is supplied
with a pack-mule and pack-saddle by Mr. Bennaton, and hence the
necessity for another to be purchased.

There are two camaradas and a servant with us, and the number of animals
is fifteen, there being three pack-mules, with five loose animals,
besides those under the saddle, exclusive of the two mules of Mr.
Auburtin. Two or three of the animals furnished by the government are
not in good condition, but those furnished by private parties are well
fitted for service, and we have much reason to be thankful for the
generosity of these gentlemen in supplying them for our use.

I have the good fortune to be mounted again upon Jack, the mule which
was furnished by Mr. Gephardt for my former tour. He has now been
purchased for the public service by Mr. Bennaton, in view of a
commission which has been intrusted to him by the Minister of
Agriculture, for a survey of routes from Campinas to Itu, and to
Araraquara, with reference to the location of a railroad. After closing
the present expedition, he expects to enter upon that service. This is a
very important movement for the future prospects of any of our people
who may locate near these places, but we cannot rely upon any thing
definite being accomplished speedily for the improvement of
transportation in that direction.

Upon leaving I called at the residence of Mr. Blackford, and got a
Portuguese and English Testament for Dr. Shaw, and, on offering to pay
for it, he told me that payment would be received in farina when
business was commenced in this country, or, in other words, it was a
present.

We halted for the night at the Ponte Cretia, where the establishment and
the feminine tenant gave but little promise of comfort. Corn, however,
for our animals, and supper of chicken and rice for ourselves, with
tolerable beds, reconciled us to the necessity of the situation. In
driving the animals to a pasture in the dark, a horse fell over a
precipice and was left for the night.


                                           TUESDAY, _December 19, 1865_.

After getting a cup of coffee and having corn given to the stock, we got
off from Ponte Cretia at 7 o’clock this morning. The horse being
extricated from the ravine proved to be but slightly injured, and all
moved on towards Itu. A number of trains of pack-mules were passed,
laden with cotton, some of the bales being marked three and a half
arrobas, (one hundred and twelve pounds,) while others were marked three
arrobas, (ninety-six pounds,) and larger in bulk than those observed
from other parts of this province. These bales correspond very much to
the bales of Osnaburg, seen in South Carolina and Georgia, being,
however, a little longer and not so broad. They are enclosed in bagging,
with the sipo vine used instead of ropes.

We met on the road Colonel Fortunato José de Camargo, who resides near
Faxina, and is engaged largely in raising horses, mules and cattle.

Mr. Auburtin informs me that he owns eighty (80) square leagues of
territory, being the largest landowner in the province.

Our weather-protectors were brought into requisition to-day to keep off
the shower of rain.

We stopped early in the day at the fazenda of Senor Joaquim José de
Silva, some two miles from the main road, where every thing needful was
provided for us.

We saw here a patch of tea-plants which had evidently grown well, but
was now neglected. The seed are round, of the size of a small acorn, and
three in each pod.

Cotton which had produced a crop last year was again growing well, after
being cut off near the ground.

Corn is also looking vigorous, and promises a good yield. All this land
is very steep and hilly.


                                         WEDNESDAY, _December 20, 1865_.

After our horses and mules came from the pasture this morning, it was
observed that some of them had blood upon their necks, caused from the
bites of the bat, known as the vampire, that not unfrequently attacks
animals at night, and fixes itself upon a vein of the neck.

Being supplied with an early breakfast, we took leave of Senor Silva and
his two good-looking daughters, who were seen then for the first and
only time during our visit. His son went with us to the Freguezia
Avasariquama, or Piedede, avoiding the steep hills by which we had
approached on the day previous.

One league beyond this place we reached the margin of the Tieté, and
proceeded along it by a very fair road fifteen or sixteen miles, when we
turned to the left, and reached the city of Itu at 6 o’clock in the
evening.

This region of country is very irregular and even mountainous, yet we
found cane growing well, and also a good prospect for corn and rice. The
river is not suited for navigation, and the settlements on both sides
depend upon the road we travelled for sending their products to market
by carts or pack-mules.

We made a halt of three and a half hours during the heat of the day at
the inn of Verzinha, getting dinner and refreshing our animals.

Upon reaching the town of Itu the urgent thirst of some of the party was
satisfied with beer, after which we repaired to the elegant and
extensive establishment of the Baron of Perecicaba. I was sorry that his
son, Antonio Paez de Barros, had left home, as my acquaintance with him
would have enhanced the pleasure of the visit.

The old gentleman, however, received us with the greatest cordiality,
and tendered us any thing he could do or furnish for our comfort.
Leaving Mr. Auburtin to talk with the baron, the rest of us strolled out
to the extensive fruitery, which is nearly a mile in length, and filled
with a great variety of trees and vines.

The best quality of pine apple, called Abacashi, is growing here
abundantly. Oranges, bananas, jaboticabas, pomegranates, figs, peaches
and apples all grow here advantageously. There was a specimen of dwarf
apple, spread over the ground like a small shrub, in the spaces between
the other trees, and having a small, pleasant-tasted fruit. Upon inquiry
I learned that this is a peculiar variety, and not the result of any
special mode of culture.

Grapes of various kinds were growing vigorously in different parts of
the grounds upon frames put up for the support of the vines. We enjoyed
a delicious treat of these fine grapes.

The tea-plant was growing over a large area, and looks flourishing,
affording a good article for table use. This shrub presents much the
aspect of the boxwood tree, and from two to four of the tender leaves
from each branch are picked off at each gathering of the crop.

Coffee likewise has a place in this collection of trees, but the soil
has not that fertility which is requisite for a good yield, and manure
is employed to give vigor to its growth.

The climate and soil of this region is regarded as particularly adapted
to the yield of fruits.

Supper was announced at 9½ o’clock, and was of the most substantial
order, with beer and wine.

Mr. Auburtin brought out his own black tea by permission.


                                          THURSDAY, _December 21, 1865_.

After breakfast the Baron joined us in a ride to the Salto of the Rio
Tieté, four miles distant.

This is an irregular water-fall, making quite a cascade at one point of
perhaps twenty feet. The entire fall of water is about fifty feet, and
the site is well suited for machinery of any magnitude that may be
desired. A large cotton factory might be located here with a prospect of
being supplied with raw material from the country below; and much of it
could ascend the river in canoes or boats to the foot of this fall.
There has been a small mill here upon a site that would warrant
extensive works, with command of any amount of water-power, and the
investment would doubtless pay handsomely.

A public highway is projected from this place to Jundiahi, the present
terminus of the railway from Santos; and this distance of thirty miles
with wagons and mules would not increase greatly the expenses on the
products of a factory.

Upon pricing a lot of horses and mules which passed over the bridge
while we were at the Salto, it was found they could be bought from
twenty-five dollars a head to forty dollars a head, but none of them
were above medium quality and many quite inferior.

In passing through the city of Itu we were shown an establishment in
which an eighteen-saw cotton-gin was moved by a portable steam-engine;
and there was in the building a thirty-saw gin idle which might have
been brought into operation by the same power. There was also a small
press in use, and I counted ten hands of various sizes employed around
these little contrivances.

Mr. Auburtin was much interested in this cotton-cleaning and packing, as
he is desirous of getting information as to the extent and nature of the
attention bestowed upon the culture and treatment of the cotton in this
and the neighboring sections.

It is important for the railroad interest that cotton shall be
successfully cultivated in this region of country; and this gentleman,
with others connected with the company, have done much in placing seed
in the hands of planters and in encouraging the growth of this staple.
His visit now, so far as I learn, has for its object the ascertaining of
the wants of the planters with a view to facilitating their growth of
cotton; and, as Major Meriwether has given him the benefit of his large
experience in growing this staple in the Southern States, he may be able
to enlighten the people of Brazil somewhat in his next article.

A number of gentlemen, among whom were two brothers of the Minister of
Agriculture, accompanied our party this afternoon to the quarry
(lapidarea) of flagstone within a mile of the city. There is an
inexhaustible bed of crude slate, of which the pavements of Itu present
fine specimens; and it is so firm that horses pass along the side-walks
without damage. The slabs in the quarry may be made of any proportions
desired, from the tile of a house-top to massive steps and columns. It
is so smooth and regular as to require no polishing. While at the quarry
we saw a huge block raised from the mass beneath by simply inserting
crow-bars between the adjacent lamina of the stone. Different strata
present different thicknesses of these lamina, suited to different
objects.

The city of Itu is made up to a large extent by the residence of parties
who own planting interests in the country around, and many of them
owning houses here spend most of their time upon their fazendas, so that
the population is not usually proportionate to the number of the houses.
The buildings upon the main plaza have a fine appearance, with iron
railings in many instances to the second-story balconies, which are
ornamented with tasteful figures, gilding, &c. I am informed that a good
dwelling may be rented here, with garden, fruit trees, &c., for less
than a hundred dollars a year; and the health of the location has a
widespread reputation. The people seen about this place have a genteel
look, and are generally neatly dressed, which bespeaks a favorable
feature of the society and the character of the inhabitants.

Our old friend the Baron presented each of our party with ear-picks and
tooth-picks made by himself from the native wood of the country, and
showed us a very old plain knife which was the only instrument used in
making them. This may be considered the baron’s amusement, and by giving
them to his friends he establishes a very close link of association, as
these two articles are more directly personal than almost any thing else
we use.

By the way, the habit of placing tooth-picks upon the table to be used
after eating is a common usage of the best people throughout all this
country; and the fancy stands for holding the wooden tooth-picks are
generally of china, but very frequently of silver, and representing a
peacock or other fowl.


                                            FRIDAY, _December 22, 1865_.

Our energetic old friend, the Baron, being apprised of our wish to make
an early move, gave us breakfast at 6 o’clock. For this we should
doubtless feel under special obligations to his two daughters, who are
inmates of the house at present. One is the wife of Senor Barros, at São
Paulo, from whom I brought a letter to the Baron, and with whom I had
travelled in the diligence in my first trip from Santos. The other
daughter is a widow whose husband died a few years since.

These ladies present an intelligent expression, and not only graced the
table with their presence on previous occasions, but even at this extra
early hour.

Taking our leave of this pleasant family we set out for Porto Feliz,
sixteen miles distant.

The lands on this route are quite thin, but the cotton is found to give
a fair yield; and many farmers, who could barely support their families
formerly, have, by the cultivation of cotton, realized a good return.
Our friend Mr. Auburtin has the credit of saving them from starvation by
introducing the cotton seed into the country; and, as an old minister of
the gospel told an abolitionist in by-gone years, that the negroes of
the South were fed on cotton seed, so I tell him it is with these
people. The amount and quality of the grass in this region does not
warrant grazing farms, and yet the cattle seen on the roadside were
generally in good order.

We reached the town of Porto Feliz at 11 o’clock A. M., and were
hospitably received by Senor Angilo Custodo de Morais, who is a
substantial and plain gentleman of much kindness of heart.

The houses here are extended upon one street for half a mile, and mostly
one-story buildings, without much taste in their structure. The church
is a large building of less antiquated style than most of those seen
elsewhere, and, with a spacious open plaza in front of it, presents the
most comely feature of the place.

We were informed that the best and most commodious houses in the town
could be rented for three dollars or four dollars per month, and living
in other respects is doubtless equally cheap. I observed in one store a
very full assortment of all the variety of goods and utensils that are
ordinarily found in one of our promiscuous country-stores, and on
pricing various articles concluded that every thing was quite as cheap
as in the United States.

Having need for some medicine to give Mr. Bennaton, I went to a
druggist’s shop and was surprised to see the variety and cheapness of
the various standard articles of the materia medica that are in common
use.

The population is about fifteen hundred, and the health is said to be
very good.

The town is located immediately upon the Rio Tieté, being, however, on
an elevated bluff far above the level of the water. We visited the old
port, which formerly was the point of embarkation for many persons
descending the river, and the river is passable for large canoes from
this point up to the Salto of Itu. Dr. Shaw and myself concluded to take
a bath, and upon swimming across the stream it was found very swift and
I was very much exhausted. As the Doctor did not undertake to cross, I
called to him to meet me on my return, and, being a tall man, he waded
into the stream as far as he could stand. The effort in swimming back
had so completely exhausted me that he had to assist me in getting
ashore. My muscles became cramped, and the current being very swift I
could not resist it even when on my feet.

We observed here, what is very common at all the water-courses near the
towns, a number of negro women in various stages of nudity, washing
clothes. They don’t use tubs, nor do they often use pots to boil
clothes; but, going into the stream with the articles, they are lashed
into the water and scrubbed until they become clean. There is usually a
preliminary soaking of twenty-four hours. Soap is used sparingly, and I
have seen in many places the leaves of a bush used, which forms a
lather, and serves the purpose of soap very, satisfactorily. A process
of bleaching by exposure to the dew and sun alternately, for several
days, is resorted to for the nicer linen garments, which gives them a
very pretty, clear, white appearance; but the delay frequently proves a
great annoyance to those who are needing their clothes.

The dorado is a fine, large fish, that is said to be abundant in this
river, but we failed to have any opportunity of testing its qualities,
nor did we see any other fish at this place.

We were called on by the Catholic priest, the vicar of this
municipality, who is a mulatto of more than ordinary intelligence; but
my prejudice to being associated with those having the negro blood could
not be so entirely put aside as to make me feel at ease with this
colored gentleman. His bearing was dignified and courteous, while he
professes to be much pleased at the prospect of having our people to
come into this province with their industrial arts. He is a native of
Bahia, and I learn that there are many people in that section having a
large admixture of the African blood.

The prevalent idea that the dark complexion of many of the people in
this warm latitude is attributable to climate only needs observation to
illustrate that the presence of negro blood is the source of the dark
hue in most instances.

Natives of the country are seen whose skin is fair and white as
elsewhere; and, though it is evident that the Portuguese race is not
clear-skinned like the German, yet the absence of blue eyes, light hair
and florid complexion is a very different thing from the tawny skin and
curly hair so frequently observed here. Any unusual darkness of hue
results from mixture of negro or Indian blood, rather than from the hot
sun or the tropical climate.

In the case of the Spanish race, it is known that the pure Castilian is
fair-skinned, with even a blond complexion, while the ordinary dark hue
of the Spaniard is attributable to the mixture of Indian blood
generally, and in some instances to the amalgamation with the negro
element.

Mr. Auburtin told our host that we did not wish to wait for breakfast,
but that a cup of coffee, with some bread and butter, and a few fresh
eggs, would be acceptable.


                                          SATURDAY, _December 23, 1865_.

Having disposed of the fresh eggs, &c., we set out for Epanema, and had
considerable difficulty in ferreting out the paths in the absence of a
guide who had engaged to conduct us to this place.

Some of the lands on this route of twenty miles were very good and yet
were not under cultivation; while more inferior lands were planted in
corn and cotton, with moderately good results.

In one instance, where the more fertile soil had been cleared and
planted, the weeds and bushes had outgrown the corn, so as to lead to
the abandonment of the crop; and it really looks as if the richness of
the soil, which gives trouble to keep the land clear, becomes a reason
for not cultivating it. There is a strange want of energy among the
common people of this country; and whatever requires much labor, even to
attain the best results, does not suit their habits.

In all this region, where coffee cannot be grown successfully, the
planters are engaging in the culture of cotton, and with some there is
quite a mania on the subject, so that breadstuffs are likely to be
neglected as formerly with us.

We reached the iron-works at Epanema about 11 o’clock A. M., and the
present superintendent, Senor Dom Joaquim de Sonsa Mursa, extended a
cordial welcome to our party. His wife is a German lady, of fine
appearance and much intelligence, who speaks English; and by her kind
attention to our comfort made us feel quite at home. The large house was
clean and neat in all its parts, and her table was very creditable to
her skill as a housekeeper.

In looking around the old structures of this vast establishment for
working iron, it is a matter of surprise that all should have been
suffered to go to wreck. The gentleman who has now undertaken the
restoration of the iron-works has a task imposed upon him which requires
an energy and tact independent of scientific attainments; and there are
practical difficulties which are not likely to be overcome while the
place continues under the auspices of the Brazilian government.

There is a mountain of iron ore of superior quality which must furnish
material to any desired extent for all future time. An inexhaustible
supply of limestone is likewise near at hand to furnish the requisite
flux, besides affording lime of an excellent quality. Sandstone is
likewise found in abundance near the works, and is now being used to
face the furnaces that are being refitted. In addition to these articles
a quarry of slate or flagstone is located in close proximity.

There is also a large amount of good timber growing upon the
mountain-slopes belonging to this property, which may be used for making
charcoal to be employed in the furnaces.

The lands are of prime quality, being the best description of terra
rocha upon the slopes adjacent to the vast reservoir of iron ore.

Under proper cultivation the soil here is suited to produce every thing
to the best advantage; and would yield all the provisions that could be
required by any number of operatives that would be necessary for the
successful working of the place.

A number of negroes, most of whom are now very old, some cattle, and
horses, and mules, belonging to the government, are here under the
charge of Major Dias Albuquerque, who resides at the works, and has been
the agent of the government for several years, simply keeping the
property together without accomplishing any thing towards arresting the
decay of buildings and machinery.

It is a magnificent ruin; and one feels like he had been transplanted to
some vast relic of the ancients, to witness such immense resources lying
in a state of entire disorder and neglect.

This place was put in operation more than fifty years ago, and at one
time did a large business; but was subsequently discontinued, and some
of the machinery was removed to be sent to another iron mine in the
province of Matto-Grosso. This never reached its destination, and lies
useless at some, point from which it is now impracticable to have it
returned.

The site labors under a great difficulty in its isolated position and
want of transportation. But the resources for producing the iron rail
for a road would warrant the erection of a rolling-mill, to prepare the
means of building a line of communication to some eligible point, and it
would be well for some enterprising capitalists to seriously examine the
advantages of a contract for these works, with a view to a permanent
occupation.

In visiting the various points we were supplied with riding animals; and
Mr. Bennaton will be furnished here with two mules of the government to
expedite our farther exploration of the country.


                                            SUNDAY, _December 24, 1865_.

All of us had comfortable quarters for the night, and Dr. Shaw and Major
Meriwether slept in a large bed, over which a crown was suspended, in
which the Emperor slept upon the occasion of his visit to this
establishment some years ago.

Being supplied with breakfast, consisting in part of fresh milk and
butter of superior make, our party left Epanema at 7 o’clock this
morning and rode twelve miles to Sorocaba.

The greater part of the route lies through campo lands of the dark red
order, having a hard and dry-looking grass that is not eaten much by
stock, and here and there a few clumps of trees known as camponia, such
as are left in a rocky place of a field.

Upon reaching the town we were received at the house of Senor Coronel
Manoel Lopez Oliveiro, to whom Mr. Auburtin had a letter from the
President of the province. He was so much occupied with his cordial
reception that he did not introduce the rest of us until requested to do
so by Mr. Bennaton. So goes the world!

Mr. Auburtin being the honored guest, was assigned a suite of rooms
alone; and the other four of us were quartered together in an apartment
of the same size, but all were very comfortably provided for in every
respect.

This gentleman is a man of large means, and has two cotton-gins with
steam-power in the city, where he prepares for the market not only the
yield of his own fazenda but a large amount purchased in the seed. He
seems under some special obligation to Mr. Auburtin for introducing his
cotton to favorable notice in England.


                                            MONDAY, _December 25, 1865_.

The explosion of a few rockets, and the ringing of the church bells at
midnight, in commemoration of the birth of our Saviour, is the only
indication we have had here of Christmas. The only thing to attract
attention is the suspension of the ordinary avocation of life, and every
one seems to wear rather a serious aspect, than to indulge in any
hilarity or festivities on the occasion.

We walked out before breakfast to deliver some letters of introduction
to parties in the town, but none of them were found, excepting Dom
Oliveiro, who treated us very courteously, and tendered us any
assistance in his power. We called also upon Senor Carlos Tolemei, who
manifested great readiness to aid us, inviting all to his house
to-night. Coffee had been served before going out, and we did not get
breakfast until ten o’clock, which was accompanied by tea and cakes, as
has been done at some other places, instead of coffee and milk.

We all rode out with Colonel Lopez to-day, to visit his plantation, and
found cotton, corn and beans, all growing together upon the same ground.
There is no regard for rows in planting any of these articles, and the
stand of cotton is in some parts a little deficient, but in the main
average; the growth is good, and the number of bolls upon the advanced
portion is large. Some of the cotton has been planted this season, but
another portion has been cut off from the growth of last season, and is
springing up again very luxuriantly. The crop gives evidence of good
culture with the hoe, and is quite free from grass or weeds, but the
cotton must suffer by mixture with corn and beans. The soil, is dark and
loose, with an admixture of large gravel, making it very liable to wash,
and hence the absence of the plough in its culture is rather
advantageous than otherwise, and more especially as there are many steep
hills under cultivation. This land corresponds more to some of the
cotton lands of the up-country in Georgia than any territory I have seen
in Brazil.

Senor Carlos rode out with us, and invited the party to visit his
cotton-gin, moved by water-power, a few miles from town, but time did
not permit. Besides these, there is also a cotton-gin in the town moved
by steam, which is owned by Senor Machado.

We were visited this afternoon by Dom Oliveiro, Dom Americo, Delegado of
Police, and Municipal Judge, and Senor José Leite Pintead, who proposed
that we should remain for an entertainment by the citizens, but our
motto being “duty before pleasure,” it could not be accepted.

Dr. Vas, of Campinas, called also to see us, being here on a trip of
recreation. He informs me that Settequéda has gone to Jahu, to purchase
a fazenda in that section, which is the first point of our exploration
of those lands.

The visit to the house of Senor Carlos was enjoyed by all very much. His
wife performs skilfully on the piano, and he sings admirably well. Beer
and champagne were served with other refreshments.

Sorocaba contains about five thousand inhabitants, and was formerly a
great mart for mules, there being eighty thousand sold here in a single
season. It is very healthy, and there is but one physician in the entire
district to meet all the needs of the people.

The city is located upon the Rio Sorocaba, from which it doubtless
derives its name.

There is a factory here of fancy whips, that is somewhat famous
throughout the province, and many of the ladies receive presents of
Sorocaba riding-whips from those who wish to pay them a compliment. The
structure of the whip is most elaborate, being plated with material of
different colors, and a part of the larger end interwoven with fine
pieces of the quills of the porcupine. The butt of the whip is covered
with silver, and has a silver chain with some ornament attached to it,
while there are two or three bands of silver on the stock.

At the same place will be found also fancy bridles, trimmed with silver;
belts of most fantastic style; girth of rare patterns; cruppers of every
variety, and saddle cloths, which are intended to be very ornamental on
the animal.

To appreciate the importance of this class of articles, it is requisite
to understand that many people here lay great stress upon their outfit
for riding, and the style differs materially from that which we have
been accustomed to see. The bridles are made in this establishment by
platting a number of thongs of raw-hide into a flat or round form, which
constitute the headstall and reins of the bridle, with sundry silver
rings at different points of each.

Where the reins unite at the hand there are two rings, secured together
by a small strap, and from each of these extends loose ends of some two
feet in length, which may be used for whipping or for securing the
animal. Martingales are very seldom used in this country.


                                           TUESDAY, _December 26, 1865_.

Having exhausted the resources of the place by our observations, we left
Sorocaba at eight o’clock this morning, after being supplied with a cup
of coffee and some biscuits by our host.

Our passage through dreary campo lands for three leagues (twelve miles)
brought us to Campo Largo, which is a very comely little village of the
mud-built type. Proceeding from this some miles, we began to observe the
slopes on our right under cultivation, with a number of neat settlements
along the lower part of the hills, which continued for a considerable
distance on our course.

The rain fell heavily at one time, but we had the good fortune to have a
house for protection, having stopped to examine some mules.

We stopped for the night at Capello de Alto, and soon found that a pile
of pea vines had to be our bed, while there were no knives and forks to
eat with. A can of my tomatoes assisted in making out the grub, and with
collards, beans, farina and stewed chicken, we made a very substantial
repast, this being the only meal of the day.

My blanket and pillow, which had been of little use heretofore, came now
into requisition, and the others used their overcoats for bedding.

The proprietor of this establishment was evidently well satisfied with
the outfit of his house, and we all thought him the most
independent-looking personage we had met. He was attired in white cotton
pants or drawers, with a short shirt of the same material outside.
Having a large goatee, and long, uncombed hair, he cut a figure.


                                         WEDNESDAY, _December 27, 1865_.

With the conviction that we could not fare worse elsewhere, we made an
early move from Capella de Alto, hoping to find a place for breakfast
within ten or twelve miles. But there was no suitable place to stop
until we reached Lamberi, sixteen miles distant, and having rode very
slowly, we got nothing to eat until two o’clock P. M.

Our road to-day lay through a hilly country, and though the soil was for
the most part thin, there was some very fair farming land. In several
places there were campos of waste land, growing only a rough grass and
the scrubby palm.

Quite a number of the native men of the country were seen about the
ranchos on the roadside, and the recruiting officers might find a good
harvest in this region. Many of the older men, and most of the women,
were affected with the goitre, that swelling of the glands of the neck
which is prevalent in the proximity of most of the serras. We observed
also, as we approached this place, quite a number of persons laboring
under the leprosy (Morfea) posted on the roadside, to ask alms of those
passing.

This miserable condition is a disease of the skin and other tissues,
which is supposed to result from the climate in connection with improper
diet; and is complicated in some instances with syphilis, or other
degenerated states of the system. The treatment of it has not heretofore
been attended with satisfactory results, but I learn that a vine has
been discovered which cures this terrible malady, and the efficacy of
this treatment will ere long be fully tested.

The subjects of this disorder are excluded from all association with
other persons, and are often found in tents or rude huts, in some
isolated spot, near the thoroughfares, so that they may gather a small
pittance from travellers, to purchase the means of subsistence. They
seem very grateful for even the smallest amount that may be given, and
we have usually thrown them a few dumps, but there was none in hand
to-day.

This being my forty-first birthday, I find myself at the middle period
of life with a crisis in my affairs which must influence the future of
myself and family very materially. To commence the world as it were anew
with six young children involves great responsibility to my wife and
myself; but I trust that all may be accomplished for our mutual welfare
and comfort, by the issue of my present investigations in this county.

The past is to be separated from the future with more distinctness than
any other periods of my existence have been, not only by the change of
events but by the alterations of our social relations; and the rending
of old ties and establishing of new associations makes the prospective
change of location a very serious consideration.

The circumstances in which we will be placed may not admit of those
advantages in rearing and educating our children which they would have
enjoyed under a different order of things; and I realize that many
duties as a man and parent devolve upon me now that differ much from
those of former years.

But being imbued with a deep-rooted sentiment of self-reliance, it is
still my privilege to exercise those energies of body and those
faculties of mind which God has given me, for promoting the welfare of
those dependent upon me.


                                          THURSDAY, _December 28, 1865_.

Having taken a cup of coffee at the inn of mine host, Captain Marianno,
we set out at 5 o’clock this morning, and after a ride of twelve miles
over hills and plains, we reached the town of Itapetininga.[26] The
first four miles lay through an irregular matto, with numerous very
steep hills; but the remaining eight miles were through campos of gently
undulating lands. Upon these there were several groups of horses and a
few herds of cattle, but neither presented an appearance that would
recommend this region for stock-raising.

We stopped with Senor Lenente Coronel Manoel Affonso Pereira Chaves, and
though plain in his garb and manner, we were made to realize that we
were heartily welcomed, while he exhibited an intelligence and general
acquaintance with this region which promises to be very useful to us.

Upon conferring with a French engineer named Prudent, who has been
employed by the government in constructing a road from this place to
Sette Barros, on the Ribeira de Ignape, Mr. Bennaton concluded this
route would be impracticable, and determined to proceed to Paranapanema.
All the roads across the serra leading to the river are said to be in
very bad order, but it being the business of this engineer to put this
road in good order, it would be well for the authorities to investigate
the cause of failure, and perhaps it would be found that another man
would be more faithful to his charge.

The people here partake generally of the mental and physical
characteristics of the country, and there is very little taste displayed
in their dwellings or other houses.

A new theatre, which is not yet completed, is by far the neatest
structure in the town, while the church is ready to tumble down from age
and decay.

The plan of the place is similar to most of those seen, having a central
open space near the church, and the streets laid off elsewhere at right
angles and not usually more than thirty feet wide.

Most of the houses have but a single story, yet there are some
exceptions, and our host has quite a large two-story residence, which,
however, is not yet completed. Senor Chaves has presented me with a
history of the province of São Paulo, for which I feel very thankful;
and it will be made one of my text-books in learning the Portuguese
language.

There is a stream of water on one side of the town upon which there is a
saw-mill, and a cotton-gin is soon to be in operation also at the same
place.

Notwithstanding this facility for water-power, we witnessed the
stupendous folly of a small cotton-gin with eighteen saws in operation
by the force of a treadmill, worked by the leg-power of men; and a screw
was also seen at the same place worked by manual force of these bipeds.

In this apparatus there is a huge upright wheel of fifteen feet
diameter, in which a man is constantly walking, and yet not advancing;
and two other men are standing upon a platform outside of the rim of the
wheel so as to use their feet upon certain pegs of wood, and thus assist
the rotary motion. Four different bands and wheels without number are
used to communicate this motion to the gin, and all this when mules and
oxen are running idle about the town. A Portuguese is the owner of this
stupid contrivance.


                                            FRIDAY, _December 29, 1865_.

Our host favored us with an early breakfast, and we set out at 8 o’clock
A. M. on the road leading to Paranapanema. Passing the Rio Itapetininga
we traversed campos varied with patches of matto for twenty miles, when
we stopped at a wayside inn kept by Senor José Ribeiro. The
configuration of the lands over which we passed was irregular, and in
some places extensive gullies or ravines had resulted from the washing
of the rains. Most of the soil of the campos in this region is of a
reddish aspect, while the matto lands are of a dark gray color, and
producing fair crops under cultivation. Corn was observed growing well,
and cotton is said to yield favorably.

The Irish potato was seen in a flourishing state at one place on the
road to-day, and we are informed that this vegetable grows successfully
in most parts of the country.

Those who plant cotton in this section are under the necessity of taking
it in the seed to the gins at Itapetininga, and we saw some being
carried on pack-mules in this form, a large basket being on each side.

At our stopping place we were informed that the proposed route from
Paranapanema to Xiririca was in wretched condition, and I suggested that
it would still be practicable to reach the Ribeira de Ignape at
Iporanga, by way of Faxina and Apiahy. This lead to a warm controversy
between Mr. Bennaton and myself as to undertaking that trip under all
the disadvantages presented, but it was finally concluded to continue
our present course.


                                          SATURDAY, _December 30, 1865_.

Starting at 7 o’clock this morning we passed over a beautiful campo
country with a portion of fair matto land, and crossing the Rio
Paranapanema we reached the town of that name at 3 o’clock P. M., making
a distance of twenty-eight miles.

There were more horses and cattle seen to-day upon the green plains than
upon any previous portion of our route, and this presents a fine
prospect for raising stock of all kinds.

Small patches of good arable land, with a growth of trees, are scattered
at long intervals throughout these extended undulating campos, and there
are also trees growing along the small streams which meets all the
demands for fuel or for making enclosure about the houses.

Within four miles of the town there is a large fazenda in the open land
owned by Senor Francisco Antonio D’Aquiar e Castro, (son of the Marquiza
de Santos,) who resides at São Paulo.

Here we saw that manure renders these lands productive, and the best
specimen of cabbage seen in Brazil was growing in the garden, while
other articles also looked vigorous.

There was a large number of hogs in most excellent condition enclosed in
a pen, and the number of corn-cobs showed that this staple was produced
plentifully in this section.

We met on the road beyond the fazenda a lot of fine hogs going to
market, and asking the price it was stated to be seven dollars per head,
and as they would average two hundred pounds, meat does not exceed three
and a half cents per pound.

The buildings of the fazenda are commodious and substantial, with a
dwelling that presents quite a neat appearance. A supply of clear water
is brought from a distance by a race or ditch; and I especially observed
the slight impression made upon this firm red clay soil by the passage
of the rapid current of water through the yard into the lot for the hogs
and cattle.

An extensive and very strong enclosure for the stock of cattle was
constructed by having large upright posts placed in the ground, with a
groove on each side, to receive the ends of poles, one above another,
thus forming a most substantial close fence. Around this enclosure a row
of trees has been planted, and protected by a railing of poles some
three and a half feet from the ground; which will in a few years afford
a good shade for such cattle as may be kept up. This planting of trees
for shading is not often seen in any part of this country, and it is a
matter of special attention in this place.

On riding into the town we met Senor Frei Ponsiano de Montaldo
Capushinho, to whom we bore a letter, which being read, we were assured
of his readiness to accommodate us.

He is the Catholic priest of the place, and has the best establishment
we saw. I observed the facings of the windows were of native pine, which
grows very large and extensively at no great distance. The church is a
combination of the old building with a new structure, but all in a rude,
unfinished condition.


                                            SUNDAY, _December 31, 1865_.

Our inquiries at Paranapanema satisfy all the party that it will not be
practicable to reach Xiririca with our animals; and in view of the
distance to Iporanga, the prearranged plan of visiting the country upon
the Ribeira de Ignape has been abandoned by my friends, Dr. Shaw and
Major Meriwether. But as I am not prone to give up any thing desirable
because of the difficulties to be encountered, I expect to proceed to
Iporanga with animals and a camarada hired by Mr. Bennaton, and thence I
will descend the river to Xiririca, where I hope to find Mr. Street.

In the mean time Mr. Bennaton will go with the other gentlemen to
Botocatu and the region of Perecicaba, including a visit to the country
around Araraquara. They will give me a report in writing of the
impressions connected with the localities visited,[27] and I expect to
furnish them an account of my observations, so that each party may be
informed as to the entire territory examined.

My proposed route, lying between the serra and the river, will give me a
very good idea of the lands on this side of the river; and my
investigations may be extended afterwards to the other side. The climate
below Xiririca is said to be very unfavorable from the rains and fogs
which prevail; but above that line the atmosphere is reported to be free
from humidity and to be healthy; while the lands are represented as
being fertile and adapted to all variety of products grown in this
country.

The temperature here to-day is remarkably cool for this latitude, the
thermometer being this evening 62° Fahrenheit; and there is a
considerable breeze, with a slight drizzle of rain, which is said to be
very common during this season. The town and country are however
represented as healthy, and there is no physician residing in the
municipality or district. Here, as elsewhere, the glands of the neck
among the women are enlarged very much.

There is quite an assemblage of people here to join in the festivities
of New Year’s Eve, and extensive preparations for a grand bonfire and
illumination, with a display of fire-works on the fantastic order. A
square pen of wood has been built in the open plaza to the height of
fifteen (15) feet, with a collection of small sticks arranged on top for
ignition, all of which is expected to burn to the ground in the course
of the evening or night. The illumination at the front of the church is
made by cups of the peel of a half orange, having oil and a taper, all
arranged into the shape of a cross, but they do not give much
brilliancy, and this display is rather a failure.

The rockets are of great variety; some giving reports like a musket,
others discharging several balls of different hues, and again a few
having a reversed action, by which a blazing mass is sent down amidst
the men, women, and children, or dividing into numerous streams of fire,
which dash hither and thither in all directions. The revolving
fire-works were decidedly successful at the close.

A few brass instruments and a violin in the hands of genteel Germans
afforded very good music.


                                                   NEW YEAR’S DAY, 1866.

This morning is clear and beautiful, with the thermometer at 64° degrees
Fahrenheit, having risen two degrees since last night. Nature seems to
be all in smiles to welcome the return of a new year. Oh, that my heart
could feel in unison with this bright and sunny morning!

But while all around is joyous, all within is sadness. The old year of
1865 has come to a close, and the events which have transpired shroud
the retrospect with gloom and sadness. Horrible in their reality, and
almost maddening to the thought, I would gladly if it were in my power
cease to think of what is past. Could the fruitless martyrdom of my
three noble brothers be forgotten, the sad fate of many who are left
behind cannot be torn from my consciousness and consigned to oblivion.
The fact that my own wife and children have been deprived of a house and
home by the ruthless hand of the hostile incendiary, stares me
constantly in the face as a terrible reality. I cannot but feel very
anxious for the present condition and the future well-being of those
near and dear to me.

Four months entire have now elapsed since any intelligence has reached
me from them or other friends, and the disturbed state of society around
them causes me much concern.

My heart feels a weight and depression not in keeping with the advent of
a new year; but, flying from the dark abyss of misery which reflection
brings to view, let me occupy my thoughts with the persons and things
around me.

The sound of music awoke us at early dawn, and several pieces were
performed to welcome the coming of another year. Upon going out, we
found quite a transformation in the plaza, by the planting of forty-two
palm trees (species of palmetto) during the night, making an avenue from
the front of the church. They are not expected to grow, but are merely
placed here as a part of the festivities of the occasion, to be
continued to-day.

The companions of my voyage thus far have now left me to return to
Itapetininga, from which point they will proceed to Botocatu. Two mules
were brought here by Mr. Bennaton, though it was known that no further
provision was to be made for me. This purchase, at forty-seven and a
half ($47.50) dollars for a saddle-mule, and thirty-five ($35) dollars
for a pack-mule, is considerably below the prices at the capital, but
above the average valuation in this region.

The outfit for three men and three attendants now consists of eighteen
animals.

I remain here for the camarada, Senor Pedro Crano D’Oliveiro, to come
with his mules, and proceed with me through the woods to Iporanga. All
these men, though performing menial service, expect a certain deference
to be shown them; and it is customary to give them the title of respect
implied by Senhor on all occasions. In fact, no freeman, white or black,
is ever addressed here without this, but it is usual to prefix it to the
first part of the name, even with persons of distinction, instead of
using the surname or family name as is done with us, in prefixing the
word Mister through respect.

My old friend, the Catholic priest, who is vicar of this district, has
given me a letter to a friend in Xiririca, and has likewise procured
another from a gentleman here to a party in Iporanga, so that I will get
assistance in both places, should I fail to meet Senor Street.

The priest belongs to the order of Friars, and signs himself accordingly
Frei, in the prefix to his name. He has gone out to attend to his duties
at the church, leaving us at his house without seeming to expect that
any of us took any interest in attending the services. The long flowing
gown, with a monk’s hood hanging on the shoulders, is worn habitually,
as indeed the clerical attire is the common dress of priests everywhere
in this country; but when he goes to the church, the ceremonial
vestments are taken by his page to be used in the services.

I went to the church to-day for the purpose of witnessing the
proceedings of the festa by the vicar; and with the assistance of a
number of persons who were attired for the occasion, he went through
various incomprehensible manœuvres, that served to attract and interest
the large concourse of people. At the close of these performances,
rockets and other sonorous fire-works were exploded most profusely.

In the afternoon there was a grand procession of these demonstrative
people, in honor of our Lady of Conception, (Nossa Senhora de
Conceicão.)

The figure of a female seated on a platform, that rested on a sort of
hand-barrow, was carried upon the shoulders of four men, and another
figure, representing some of the saints, supported in like manner,
accompanied it, while a large rich awning was hoisted upon the ends of
six poles in the hands of as many men, under which the old vicar and a
brother priest moved forward with certain symbols, among which was a
silver cross encircled by a halo of brightness. This other priest is
also a friar, and gives his name in full as Frei José de Loro, Director
de Tijuco Preto, Ministerio Apostolico Capuchinho. He is from Italy, as
is also the old vicar, the former being in this country only eight
months, while the latter has been here twenty years, and says he has
almost forgotten his native tongue.

Formed into line, with music in full blast, they marched in much
apparent solemnity with their heads bowed, throughout the principal
streets of the town, accompanied by most of the men, women and children
that were present. On the return of the procession, the explosion of
fire-works was deafening, and had an appearance in mid-heaven like the
bursting of bombshells, when a hot engagement of artillery is
progressing.

An address was subsequently made in the church by the vicar, but was not
adapted to my limited comprehension of the language.

The proportion of men present was small, and for the most part scrawny
specimens, with very shabby dress, having in many instances a sort of
cloak (ponché) which covers all other deficiencies of dress. The absence
of men having better physique is attributable to their apprehension of
being recruited for the army, which induces them to forego the
indulgence of public festivities.

The number of women in attendance was very large, and with few
exceptions of mixed blood, either of the Indian or negro. Some of them
were comely in form and neatly dressed, but far the greater number were
downright ugly. Here, more even than at other places, the old and the
young have the glands of the neck enlarged, constituting goitre, or, as
called here, “papo.” This affection is ascribed to various causes;
humidity of the atmosphere, bad diet, or deficiency of nutritious food,
sleeping in exposed situations, combined with the water of the serras,
are the usual concomitants.

In the vicinity of the Alps, it is known to prevail extensively, and is
attributed by some writers to the use of snow-water. But here we have no
snow-water, while there exists a geological formation in these serras
which corresponds to that mountainous region; and it is highly probable
that there exists some peculiar mineralogical principle in the water
coming from these elevations which produces this result.

The better class of people are rarely seen with it, yet even those with
all the comforts of life are not entirely exempt when living in these
situations adjacent to a serra.

The old vicar has a woman with several children in the house with him,
who is housekeeper and without a husband; while the youngest of the
children indicates clearly its paternity.

Those acquainted with the habits of some of the priesthood in Brazil
will not regard this allusion as indelicate, or involving any thing
unbecoming.

Though there were servants about the house, the vicar insisted upon
doing most that was required for us.


                                             TUESDAY, _January 2, 1866_.

Soon after I arose this morning, my old camarada, Senor Pedro, came in
to make the announcement that all was ready for the anticipated voyage,
and attributed his failure to go on yesterday to the straying of a mule.
But my inference is, that he could not bear the idea of leaving this
festa and grand procession, and availed himself of a subterfuge, to
quiet my impatience under the delay beyond his time appointed for
starting.

I was supplied with a cup of coffee, and gave my old friend, the vicar,
a heartfelt expression of my thanks for his kindness; when he gave me
his best wishes for a prosperous voyage, and embraced me after the
Brazilian manner,[28] with a warmth which made me feel that I was
leaving a real friend.

In repairing to the house of Senor Pedro, he provided some farina, stew
of beef, and big hominy, with bananas, for my breakfast, which were
despatched with the aid of a spoon, as knives and forks seemed to be no
part of his household furniture. This finished, I found that all the
family were preparing to set out with us, as we were to go that day to a
place owned by this man some twenty miles distant in the country. The
horses for the women were brought through the house and taken into the
back yard for them to mount. They soon sallied forth all astride, with
their skirts so arranged as to cover their nether extremities, and,
having drawers with straps under their feet, they were in regular trim
for the expedition.

The old woman and three grown daughters were all mounted after this
style, and seemed to use their stirrups and manage their horses as if
they had been used to this mode of travelling. Their saddles are
somewhat different from those used by the men, having a quilted seat,
which serves as a cushion to protect them in riding astride.

Upon going out of town, we fell in with another party of women who had a
more genteel appearance, and were seated in the ordinary way upon
side-saddles,—one of them being especially well provided with horse and
equipments. She was a young lady, very tidily dressed, and rather the
best-looking woman seen in this section. One of the women of this party
was the wife of a son of my old camarada, and her husband was carrying
their only child before him on his mule.

The third member of this party was the mother of the other two women,
but they are all of a very different stamp from the family to which they
have become connected by marriage, and I could not but think they viewed
our party of women astride of their horses as presenting a disgusting
aspect. One of the daughters of my escort had a young child, and carried
it most of the way in her arms, while her mother, an old woman of fifty
years, carried it the rest of the time. These women rode the entire
twenty miles astride without dismounting, and did not show any
particular fatigue on arrival.

Within half a mile of Paranapanema we entered the forest, and, for three
miles, the soil was red, and would certainty produce a fair yield of any
thing that might be cultivated.

This land lay remarkably level for the general character of the country,
and yet none of it has ever been cleared up. Passing through this, the
soil was of a dark aspect, with a clay basis, and, though sundry ravines
interrupted the configuration of the surface, there was a great deal of
land lying very favorably. Very little of it has been brought into use,
but the few specimens of corn seen along the road presented a good
appearance.

Upon approaching the place of Senor Pedro, a considerable river, São
José, came into view; and he informs me that there is a water-fall of
great extent, ten or twelve miles below, which is surrounded by timber,
and yet has a road passing very near to it. This might be turned to
account, should any one be tempted to locate in this drear and rude
wilderness.

After our arrival, I accompanied Senor Pedro to examine his corn, and
found it growing very luxuriantly—the stalks being, in most parts, ten
feet high, and standing close upon the ground. His calculation is for
thirty bushels to the acre, but it is likely to exceed that yield, if
the earing is at all proportionate to the present prospect.

The country just at this place is very hilly, and there seems to be a
great preference to the hillsides for planting, from the fact doubtless
that the soil is better than on the level land.

There are pumpkin vines growing finely in this corn, and cucumber vines,
and watermelon vines were seen in a patch near by growing well; yet none
of them are sufficiently advanced to determine the result.

The few and isolated settlements seen upon our route to-day, as well as
the one at which I am stopped, show very little regard for the comforts
of life, or very little advance in civilized life.

If a picture of the interior of this domicil could be adequately
portrayed, it would be a rich legacy to posterity, to dwell upon the
meagre and filthy surroundings of this able-bodied family. In eating,
the victuals were put on a towel upon a bench, and I occupied the only
seat that was afforded by the establishment, while the fare was limited
to farina, pork, and big hominy, with coffee.

I have looked at the bright side of society in this province, and now
the opportunity is afforded to view and study another phase of the
people; but the transition is sad to contemplate, and worse still to
realize by actual participation.

The only redeeming feature about the place is a few very fat hogs in the
yard, and there has not been seen anywhere more fat on an animal than
covers one of these hogs.

The mules are also in fine condition, and most excellent travellers.
What is out of doors meets the requirements of life very well, but enter
the house and all is squalid wretchedness and beastly slovenliness. The
people fare worse than the brutes.

My old camarada having me now in his power, informed me that it would be
necessary to take one more horse than was expected in his arrangement
with Mr. Bennaton, and that instead of going for ten dollars as he had
agreed, that he must have seventeen dollars and fifty cents. Upon my
objecting he then named fifteen dollars, saying that he would have to
take provisions for us and the animals; and, under all the
circumstances, I acceded to this proposition, as it is the exact amount
supplied by Mr. Bennaton for expenses.


                                           WEDNESDAY, _January 3, 1866_.

I brought out my blanket and pillow last night to facilitate the
preparations of mine host for my night’s rest; and a rude bedstead with
cords of the sipo vine, over which were some matting, a horse-blanket,
and a sheet, gave promise of comfort. But the numerous fleas beset me so
that I was induced to strip off shirt and drawers and wrap up in the
blanket to protect myself against them. Getting once clear of these
pests, and having the woollen blanket next my person, it was
impracticable for them to make an entrance, as their legs get tangled in
the wool so as prevent jumping, or even crawling to any considerable
extent.

It is somewhat remarkable that no bedbugs or chinches have been seen in
this country, and it is fortunate for the lower classes (who are so
filthy) that this insect does not propagate here to any large extent.

I am sitting upon my trunk writing, while the corn is being shelled and
other arrangements are progressing for our outfit. My two tin-plates,
and knife and fork, have been brought forth for use here, and upon the
voyage. I gave my friends at Paranapanema upon separating a can of
tomatoes, and one of partridge, reserving two cans of tomatoes and one
of mutton for this trip; and, from the present aspect of affairs, they
are likely to be in urgent demand, as supplies are scarce.

One of the men working on this place has shot a large monkey, and these
people tell me that these ugly animals are frequently eaten here, but I
hope it will not be served up for our trip.

One of the advantages I hoped to derive in being separated entirely from
those speaking English was improvement in the use of the Portuguese
language, but these caipiras have such a bad pronunciation that I have
considerably greater difficulty in communicating with them than with
educated Brazilians, and there is not much encouragement to learn any of
the language from them, so that I will talk no more than is needed.

After a great trial to my patience, we started at noon, and I found the
son was to accompany the old man as my escort for the voyage. Making a
halt at the son’s house, I found a cucumber lying on the table, and
getting some salt, it was enjoyed very much. This is a new place, as is
also that of the wife’s family near by, and there are a number of new
shanties through this obscure tract of country, which have been built as
retreats for those getting out of the way of recruiting officers. I
witnessed the modus operandi of dodging the issue this morning, in the
movements of a man and his wife.

She was mounted astride of one horse, and sundry supplies of eatables
were packed in panniers upon another tackey, while the man went afoot
with his gun. Upon inquiry as to their destination, the only answer was,
that they were going into the forest to sojourn for a time.

The country passed through to-day was for the most part hilly and very
poor, having the native pine in great number and of large size, which
here, as its namesake with us, is an indication generally of thin soil.
The wood of this is more like the soft white pine, and not much used.

An hour before sundown we reached a house, when my escort intimated to
me we would stop for the night. I suggested that we had made a very
short journey, being only fifteen miles, and that it was some time until
night; yet he said there was no house, water, or pasture to be found at
any convenient distance, so that I had to acquiesce. Now we shall see
more of caipira life, but in somewhat better condition than the
miserable abode of my old camarada’s family. The house was a very good
mud wall and thatched roof structure, with four divisions; one being for
the corn, another the cooking-apartment, and the two others for
sleeping-rooms. As the manner of constructing the walls of these houses
is characteristic of this class of people, it may be stated that upright
timbers are placed in the ground at the corners, and at such other
points as the size of the building requires, upon which rests the plates
for the roof. Between these uprights are arranged vertically and
longitudinally, making a check-work, numerous small strips or laths of
the palmetto, upon which is plastered a mortar composed of clay with an
admixture of cow-dung. This last-named article is used in this country
to give tenacity to the mortar, and, from the general resort to it, I
infer that it must serve a good purpose. A wall plastered in this way on
the outside and inside gives protection to the inmates from the weather,
and, if not subjected to any violence, will remain for a number of years
in good condition.

These thatched houses (palhaçar casas) are covered with a kind of long
coarse grass, or with the leaves of a species of palm, secured to the
laths of the roof by the sipo vine; and each layer extending partly over
the foregoing, a very thorough security against rain is effected. With
occasional repairs, this covering serves as protection for ten or twelve
years.

In such walls, and with such a covering, an earth floor is usually
found, and this may be the natural soil, if in a clay region, but is
usually made with mortar, such as is used on the walls. As it is very
rare to see a chimney in any kind of a house in Brazil, this style of
building is of course without any other place for a fire than upon the
dirt floor, in the middle of the apartment used for cooking, and the
smoke finds its way through the roof as best it may.

The house at which we are to spend the night is owned by Senor José
Francisco de Aranna, who is a tall, dark-skinned man, and probably
having a mixture of Indian and negro blood; while his wife is a stout
and rather comely white woman, being much fairer complexioned than most
of those seen in this country. She seemed to be expected to perform most
of the labor about the establishment, and got our dinner ready in a
reasonable time.

The table for myself and my two attendants consisted of a large stool,
having a cloth which only partially covered it, upon the middle of which
was poured a large pile of farina, and upon each of three corners were
plates, filled with regular home-made hominy and pieces of pork which
had been cooked with it.

Not having met with any gritz before, since coming to Brazil, I enjoyed
this dish hugely.

After it was disposed of, these plates were removed and others with
small bits of fried pork were set down before each of us, which were to
be eaten with the farina; but my appetite had been pretty well satisfied
with the previous abundant supply, and I ate but little of this, while,
however, my attendants made clean plates. Again we were called upon to
partake of a dessert of big hominy, which was very nice, but beyond the
capacity of my stomach, yet the other men managed to worry down all that
was served.

As I have stated elsewhere, the big hominy is made here with the whole
grains of corn, by being pounded in a mortar, and they don’t seem to
know any thing of treating it with lime or ashes, to remove the outside.
Its use is confined entirely to the category of dessert, even among the
best people in the land, under the name, cangica.

While the articles furnished on this occasion were substantial, and the
surroundings clean, the style of serving them was very primitive and
plain, presenting a fair type of the living among the better order of
caipiras.

Our host filled out the backwoods character by giving me some music on
the viola, which is an instrument resembling the banjo, but with
metallic strings, and is in great repute with these people. He sang at
my request, which gave a zest to his performance, and I gave the best
evidence of the soothing influence of his music by going to sleep during
the rather protracted performance. Being in the dark, none of the party
observed this act of appreciation.


                                            THURSDAY, _January 4, 1866_.

I was honored during the night with the only bedstead in the house,
consisting of some forks driven into the ground, upon which some small
straight poles were laid, and having over them a piece of flag matting.
With the assistance of my blanket and pillow, my sleep was profound and
refreshing.

The old man who accompanied me reposed in the crib upon the unhusked
corn, while the son spent the night in some equally convenient place, of
which I was not advised.

We were not permitted to leave without breakfast, and giving again the
bill of fare will afford a farther specimen of the good things enjoyed
by this class of people. The immense pile of farina on the cloth in the
middle of the stool greets us at the outset, with a big deep plate full
of beans and small pieces of meat for each of us, on the corners of this
temporary table. There being no seats about the house, I use my trunk as
was done last evening, and the others hunker down to it.

This was followed by plates of soup, in which the beans and meat had
been cooked, and we were expected to eat farina with it. There is a
peculiar art with these people, in throwing the farina into their mouths
with a spoon, and not touching the lips with it, so that all use the
same spoon without any indelicacy, in eating from the common pile. Next
came the big hominy, and we closed with plates of sweet milk. These
articles should have been served together, and thus conformed to the
usages among the better class, but they were furnished separately in
this caipira regime.

We had no coffee here, and as it is more in keeping with these people to
use the rum of the sugar-cane, (cachaça), it was tendered but declined.

I observed after eating each time, that my camaradas rose to their feet,
and bringing their hands in contact before them, went through some short
ceremony, which was construed as a thanksgiving for what they had
received. This I presume is peculiar to the class, as nothing of the
sort has been observed among the better order of people. There is no
asking of blessing at table, or returning thanks, nor is there any
family worship, where I have been heretofore; but among these people I
heard a service at the house of Senor Pedro, before I rose in the
morning, which seemed to be some devotional exercise on the part of the
family; and it is evident that some of them have more regard for
religious observance than the more refined class of society throughout
this country.

Returning my acknowledgments for the hospitality received, we took our
leave of this very respectable backwoods family and set out, with the
assistance of another caipira to show us the route.

We were shown first into a blind path, leading down a steep hill, and
with a continuation of hills and hollows through the woods for a
considerable distance, but reached after a time a plainer way, leading
by the most irregular and winding course that ever man or beast has
travelled. It was that style of substitute for a road known here by the
name picado, and consists in having a few of the small saplings and
shrubs cut out, so that a horse may pass, and scarcely permitting a
rider to accompany him.

At one time the knees are in contact with a tree in making a short turn;
at another, a limb or bent cane of immense size endangers the head, and
but for the use of the large sheath-knives carried by the camaradas, the
path would have been impassable in many parts. These tremendous
cutlasses, with which every camarada and almost every traveller is
equipped, are equal to a small axe in clearing away obstructions; and
though it looks somewhat savage to see them sticking in the belt of
almost every man upon a voyage, they are very useful, and even
necessary, in a trip such as the present.

Neither of my attendants wore shoes, and upon entering this narrow and
rugged path, beset with brambles and thorns, they rolled up their
breeches above their knees, having less fear of tearing their flesh than
of injuring their clothes. Indeed their scanty outfit of wearing apparel
made this precaution very proper, in view of the tough appearance of the
natural covering of their legs. With my boots outside of my pants I
secured a like immunity from damage to my raiment.

From our entrance into these woods until we passed out into the Faxina
road, a distance of sixteen miles, we were surrounded by lands which
were evidently of good quality; and yet, for the most part, so hilly as
to render their cultivation very difficult. A portion of the soil is
what is known among us as mulatto land, and other parts of a dark gray
aspect. The supply of water at all points is quite sufficient for
domestic uses, but only two places that would afford facilities for
erection of machinery.

The remoteness of these lands belonging to the public domain from a
market, and the great difficulty of getting a practicable road in any
direction, must be a barrier to the occupation of this territory;
otherwise it might be a desirable location for families.

I observed in the midst of this immense forest a small pole pen, and,
upon inquiry, learned that it had been used for confining hogs at night
that were driven along this route to Iporanga.

The nature of the soil and the character of the growth changed
materially on reaching the large open road; and here again we
encountered the pine, indicating thin land, though lying more favorably.

After proceeding upon this road, leading from the town of Faxina to
Iporanga for four miles, we halted for the night at a beautiful stream,
and I availed myself of the opportunity to take a most refreshing bath
after the fatiguing day’s travel.

We had travelled twenty miles only, but, considering the nature of the
road, it was a good result.

After the horses had grazed around until they were satisfied, they all
came up near our rancho and stood for some time, in expectation of
something more substantial. But just then the men were preparing dinner,
and while we were eating our broiled pork and farina, of which the meal
consisted, the animals all moved off upon the road we had come. I
intimated to them that the animals were going away, “Os animals estão
indo embora,” to which one of them simply replied, that they would not
go far, “Não vão longe;” but after finishing his grub the old man set
out in search of them upon my suggesting that they would probably return
to his house, “Talves aquelles animals voltarão a sua casa.”

After he had been gone for half an hour, I perceived the son was getting
very anxious, but nothing was said indicating any misgivings, while it
struck me very forcibly that we might be destined to camp here much
longer than desirable. At length the young man started off on the road,
when I called to him “Onde vai, Senhor?” (Where are you going, sir?) To
which he replied that he was going for fuel—“para lenha,” and turned
into the woods. My impression was that he was starting to look for the
old man and the mules, but I had no idea of being left here in the wild
woods alone, and I kept my eye on his movements closely. At length the
old man returned with the animals, having run some two miles to overtake
them on their homeward-bound course; and they have received a caution,
which will enable them in future to understand the movements of these
brutes. They now gave them their corn, and confining the only horse in
the train with a bell on his neck, as a rendezvous signal, the mules
were allowed to go at large for the night.

We found at this place an old dilapidated rancho of the palm leaves, and
seeing that a rain was approaching I stretched my blanket under this,
and it served to protect all three of us from the showers that occurred
at intervals during the night. My position was on the outside, the
others between me and the fire; and the thought occurred to me more than
once that any wild beast that might approach from these dense woods must
come upon me first, yet I did not care to lie so near the fire as the
change would bring me, and gave no signs to them of having any
apprehension.


                                              FRIDAY, _January 5, 1866_.

A pot of beans with the shank-bone and feet of a shoat having boiled
over the fire during the night, the coffee was promptly prepared and the
breakfast was soon served, when I moved off to encounter the worst roads
that can ever be travelled. Each of the party was well mounted, and our
two pack-mules were substantial and active; but it was with the greatest
difficulty that the animals scrambled up the hills, and required the
greatest care in sliding down the steep slopes, while the ridges and
mud-holes in the comparatively level portions of the road were most
serious obstacles to their progress. These roads, where pack trains of
mules travel, become crossed from side to side with alternate ridges and
hollows by the constant treading of the animals in the same tracks. In
strict keeping with the Brazilian character, they follow in the
footsteps of those who have gone before, and nothing induces them to
change their unvarying adherence to the same track. Thus, one after
another, and four or five abreast in a broad road, lines are formed
entirely across, resembling when they become dry the ridges formed for
planting the sweet potato. Indeed this correspondence is so striking
that the first instance seen, being upon a road that had ceased to be
travelled by these troops of pack-mules, induced me to think that a crop
of potatoes or other roots had been planted there. Yet, upon inquiry, I
learned that these ridges resulted from the very thing encountered on
the road to-day, and by lapse of time all signs of tracks had
disappeared.

On our route the depressions were either full of water and mud, or the
slope at one side kept them drained; but in either case it was difficult
for the mules to step over the high ridges, and one needs but to try the
experiment of stepping repeatedly over elevations of this kind to know
how tiresome it must prove to the animal when kept up for some
considerable time.

On the hillsides the clay was for the most part solid, and with a slight
rain that was falling it was very slick, which impeded our ascent; and
our descent of these slick smooth slopes was something very peculiar,
and to me quite amusing. The mules seemed to understand the thing
perfectly, and would glide down as boys descend a steep clay bank upon a
slide, making a continuous impression like the trail of a small narrow
slide upon the side of the hill, from top to bottom. The two pack-mules
were kept ahead, and upon reaching the top of one of the hills, away
they would go one after the other, and as soon as they were out of the
way, then down went the animals of the camaradas, as if upon skates, in
quick succession, and going with that great speed resulting from the
declivity. At the outset, I felt some concern as to following this
example upon my staunch and rather tall mule, hunting for a rough part
of the ground to descend so as to keep his feet from sliding. But I soon
found that it was better to let him go as the others did, and when he
would get under way on a long, steep hill, he went down almost with the
velocity of a locomotive-engine.

These mules are without shoes, and indeed the best-secured shoes would
probably be lost in the stiff mud. The hoof penetrates the clay in the
soft parts of the road, and when drawn out it pops at every step like a
cupping-glass jerked suddenly from the skin. Only one of the animals
made a complete fall during the day, and that was the horse, which was
running loose at the time. The mules frequently slipped upon their knees
in ascending the slick hills, but were upon their feet again in an
instant. These men give their mules the rein entirely loose in
descending the hills; and though I felt like keeping a check upon my
bridle at first, I observed that the others got on better without
tightening their reins, and that the pack-mules went safely without
bridles, so that I soon concluded to give my brave and sturdy mule his
will, letting him select his own way and his own speed in descending the
hills.

When we approached the crest of the serra, the route became so very
steep and rugged that, in compassion to my faithful animal, I dismounted
and walked up several hills. The camaradas had previously on sundry
occasions relieved their animals by walking; and the old man got a fall
in going up a slick hill very much such as that which occurred to the
horse.

There has been a considerable amount of labor bestowed upon this route
across the serra, to make it practicable for pack-mules and those under
the saddle; yet it is very difficult to make the trip even with
excellent animals, and inferior stock could not traverse this awful
road.

I am now entirely satisfied as to the cause of the cotton and other
freight going from Faxina and other neighboring places, over the long
route by way of São Paulo, to Santos upon pack-mules.

The difficulties of the passage across this serra may not be so great
elsewhere as the route by which I travelled to-day; but from all that
can be learned it is not likely that communication will ever be made
easy from that region to the navigable waters of the Ribeiro de Ignape.
Should the same amount of labor be given to the line from Itapetininga
to Sette Barros which has been expended upon the Serra de Santos, it is
most likely that a practicable road could be made there; and that route
is perhaps the most important of any that could be selected for the
accommodation of the public interests of the country. The vast and very
fertile region of Botocatu would find a ready outlet for its products by
this line of communication, and the large tract of agricultural country
lying between this place and Apiahy calls loudly for a road to this
river, over which wagons as well as pack-mules may pass with facility. A
road to Sette Barros, or some point on the Rio Inquia, would secure
steamboat transportation, and redound to the greatest benefit of the
people throughout this entire region, while it would promote vastly the
interests of the government. If the difference of freight by such a
line, and the long line of pack-mules to Santos, is considered, it ought
to induce prompt action in effecting it.

In different parts of the serra, which is here known as the “Morreo de
Chumbo,” (hill of lead,) large mines of lead ore have been discovered;
and the large proportion of metal and its freedom from impurities would
insure an abundant yield.

Large masses of limestone are also present in several places. In one
place, iron ore was likewise observed, which is doubtless connected with
an extensive deposit. I was particularly struck with collections of
superior red chalk, which would be well adapted for red pencils, as well
as the ordinary marking purposes of chalk, while it might also serve as
a pigment when ground. There is said also to be a deposit of coal in the
range of hills next to Iporanga, but this may be a misapprehension of
inexperienced persons. Should there prove to be coal-mines here, the
value of the whole assemblage of mineralogical specimens would be
immensely enhanced.

All these treasures might be made available which are located upon
slopes of the serra looking towards Iporanga, but on the other side the
difficulties of transportation are almost insurmountable.

Upon the top of the serra, between two ridges, there is a farm, upon
which corn was growing most luxuriantly. Bananas and coffee trees were
also seen at another place, looking very well.

An exceeding fine black bull was observed all alone far up on the ridge,
and his appearance indicated fine stock. Other cattle in excellent
condition were seen elsewhere, and in one group there were four bulls,
two of which were very large.[29]


                                            SATURDAY, _January 6, 1866_.

We reposed last night at an old site of a fazenda, belonging to the
estate of Senor Rafael, who died about a year since leaving a large
property. A negro woman, having charge of the house, gave it up to our
possession, and assisted us some in our culinary arrangements, for which
she was rewarded by taking breakfast with these camaradas, after I had
eaten my frugal meal. The farina was made into mush this morning, and
thus furnished something of a variety in our fare.

Having now descended from the elevated land, we proceeded along a
stream, called the Ribeirão de Camarga, which was crossed no less than
nine times within a few miles; and after leaving it, three other smaller
streams were crossed within as many hundred yards, all converging to
empty into one channel that was subsequently passed, as it made its way
into the great receptacle of these waters, the Ribeira de Ignape.

Within six miles we reached the village of Iporanga, and ascertaining
that Senor João Paulo Dias, to whom I bore a letter, was not in town, I
called at his house, and found Senor Joaquim José Vieyra da Rocha in
possession, who treated me very kindly. He provided a very good meal for
me, and yet having no knife on the table, left me to manage with a fork
and a spoon. Upon intimating my wish to arrange for proceeding upon my
journey, he went and brought Senor Manoel Joquim da Rocha, who advised
me to proceed to Xiririca in a canoe, and arrange there for farther
progress.

To this I acceded, and requested him to make all the requisite
arrangements for the trip on the water, and let me know what was to be
paid. He stated that it would be better for me to go this afternoon,
some eight miles down the river to the situ of Senor João Paulo, to whom
I had brought the letter, and spending the night with him, I could
resume my voyage to-morrow morning. All being in readiness, he went with
me to the point of embarkation, and upon my proposing to pay, he said
all was settled in advance, and that I had nothing to pay. Besides this,
he gave me two letters to parties in Xiririca, to facilitate my progress
from there. This gentleman being an entire stranger, and having no
personal interest whatever in serving me, I appreciated most gratefully
his kindness in this matter.

I learned from Senor Manoel that Senor Street had been here some days
ago, but had returned to Cananea, and perhaps to São Paulo; yet it was
my expectation that he might still be found at the former place, and my
wish was to communicate with him if possible in this region.

In descending the river, my negro boatman told me that the gentleman to
whose house I was going was one of a party in canoes at a landing near
by us. I directed him to stop his canoe at this place, and upon meeting
Senor João Paulo, the letter of Senor Joaquim Custodio Merada of
Paranapanema was delivered to him. He invited me to return with him and
his family to the town; but upon stating to him my destination, he
proposed at once to go back with me to his situ below.

I suggested to him that this would perhaps incommode his family, but all
seemed to acquiesce cheerfully, and returned.

His cotton field was visited, and the land seemed to be well adapted to
the growth of this article; but the work was very deficient, and the
want of proper culture was indicated in the large number of stalks that
were allowed to remain in a hill. In some instances, I counted as many
as eight stalks growing in close proximity to each other, and the hills
generally had more than three stalks. I advised him to reduce the stand
to two stalks in a place, for a portion at least of his crop, that he
might see the benefit of thinning it out. I selected one stalk which
happened to be alone, and counted upon it twenty-two squares; and no
stalks where there was two or more in a place exceeded sixteen squares,
thus illustrating on the spot the advantage of more space.

A portion of the plants on this place have been destroyed by the ants,
(formica,) and I suggested to him that the use of the plough in planting
and in the subsequent cultivation of the cotton, would be likely to keep
the soil free from the ant:

Another portion of the field was overrun with the weeds; and even the
hoe had not been used in any part of his cotton, so as to afford a good
result. A part of this land is river bottom, but above ordinary
inundations, while another part is elevated land, running up from this
flat, and it seemed that the latter was the best suited to the
production of cotton, being also less liable to the attacks of the ant.
This low land would doubtless suit corn well, yet it is here as we see
all the world over, the article that is supposed to bring most money has
precedence; and no corn was seen, though he stated that it was planted
in some other portions of land.

The lands lying along the river thus far are very hilly and almost
mountainous, with here and there, as at this place, a level space in
which cotton, corn, or sugar-cane is planted. The more irregular lands
are usually covered with mandioca, the root of which is the great source
of farina, that is so generally used as food in this country.

Coffee trees were observed growing well in the yard at this place,
having a good crop of berries and abundant blooms, where the berries
were not yet formed. Senor João informed me that coffee gives a good
yield here, and that there is no frost in this section to damage the
crop.

There is a rice pounding-mill in operation adjoining the dwelling, and
it is expected to connect a cotton-gin with the same water-power.

As yet there are no cotton-gins in this region of country, and any one
who would anticipate the supply of the planters by erecting machinery
for cleaning and packing cotton upon this river, would realize a fine
return from his investment.

Senor João gave me this evening a fine specimen of lead ore, taken from
a deposit within five miles of Iporanga; and he says there is certainly
a bed of coal in the same vicinity, specimens of which he has sent to
Rio de Janeiro, but no report has yet been received from the examination
of it. He states that a good road can be made from the site of this lead
and coal to the river, and transportation in large canoes thence to
Xiririca, at which point the river becomes navigable for steamboats.

A large coal-mine here would be far more valuable than a gold mine to
the fortunate owner.

Senor João Paulo Dias is the delegado of police for the municipality of
Iporanga, and occupying a position in society which entitles his
statements and opinions to respect. Upon inquiring the facts as to
health and climate in this locality and the adjacent country, he gives
an unqualified voucher for their salubrity and pleasantness. I see
nothing that could induce disease; and the atmosphere is dry, with the
sun shining all the day brightly, while the elevation gives a more
pleasant temperature than in lower places, or even in the plateau lands.

I am informed that none of these troublesome little insects which
penetrate the skin of the feet, and other parts, are found here, and yet
there are hogs constantly about the yard.

I learn here that the lands of Dom Prates, of which mention was
previously made, are located near the route from Apiahy to Iporanga, and
though hilly are considered fertile. It is stated, however, that the
coffee trees planted there have all died, from some inscrutable cause. I
am satisfied that the land is very unfavorably located for
transportation, and shall not try to visit it under all the
circumstances.

The important matter in selecting a place is to secure lands adapted to
all the variety of products, which are exempt from liability to
sickness, and affording ready means of communication with a market, by
means of navigation. Such I trust may be found combined in the
neighborhood of Xiririca; and without spending time looking at other
points I will proceed to investigate those lands.


                                              SUNDAY, _January 7, 1866_.

Though this day should have been observed as a day of rest, the
arrangement of Senor Manoel made it incumbent to proceed in his canoe
down the river to-day. After breakfasting with Senor João Paulo I was
provided with a supply of chicken, fish, etc., etc., for my dinner, and
took my departure at 9 o’clock A. M. The large fish, of which I had a
part, and had also partaken at breakfast, was caught with a hook from
the river, and though the name has escaped me, it was a fine specimen of
what these waters produce. I understand that large fish are not so
frequent here as lower down in the stream, but that there are a great
many of good size for table use in all parts of the river.

While coming down in the canoe I read in the Portuguese Testament the
sixth chapter of St. John’s gospel, and tried to profit by the lessons
of dependence upon the Lord which it inculcates.

In the early part of my descent the lands were quite mountainous on each
side of the river, but the irregularity of the surface gradually became
less, until I reached a region where the elevations afforded only an
agreeable relief to the more uniform configuration of the surface.

All the corn seen in the first part of the voyage seemed to have been
planted early, and had become prematurely dry, giving an unfavorable
impression of the yield of this region. But that observed lower down,
and more recently planted, looked fresh and vigorous, while the corn
approaching maturity was evidently of better stamina than that passed
above. This change was evident after descending twenty miles, and
decided after reaching the Inguary. This small river enters opposite to
a very pretty island, which looks as if it would be productive; and the
appearance of the corn on each bank of the Ribeira indicated good soil.

Upon descending further, the Laguary, a larger stream on the left, was
passed, and I was told that canoes ascend it to a considerable distance.

Below this is the island of Bananal Grande.

My sturdy negro boatman did not seem inclined to expend much his
energies upon his paddle, and I endeavored to stimulate him by offering
a reward for a quick trip. But he subsequently sat down to paddle, and
actually went to sleep. I then said that he must be very tired, and
proposed to relieve him for a time, but he insisted there was no need of
my doing so, and seemed to turn over the paddle to me reluctantly. My
progress was not the most satisfactory, and getting into a swift place,
the canoe made headway towards a point of land which I had to turn. The
negro, perceiving my inability to manage his craft, again took the
paddle, and after this there was no more sitting down to sleep. These
fellows stand up in using the paddle or pole, and it is surprising how
long they can continue this severe labor without intermission. This
canoe was a regular dug-out, as are all on this river. It measured about
twenty (20) feet in length, two (2) feet across the mouth, and eighteen
(18) inches deep. The general thickness did not exceed one inch, with a
belt of increased thickness in the middle, and with somewhat more
substance in the bottom.

The negro informed me that such a canoe could be bought for six dollars
($6.00) at Iporanga.

Reaching Xiririca shortly after 6 o’clock P. M., I went immediately to
the house of Senor Miguel Antonio Jorgi, and upon presenting the letters
I bore from various parties, he proposed that I should proceed with him
and his family down the river to his situ. To this I cordially assented,
saying, “En eston as suas ordens.” His wife was introduced to me, and
having learned that she spoke English, I forthwith propounded the
interrogatory, “Falla Inglez, Senhora?” But I was answered, “Não,
Senhor. Esquece toda lingua Ingleza.” She had spoken English when she
was first married, but having no one to converse with for eight years,
it had been forgotten, and I was left to my small acquirements in
Portuguese as the only means of communication with this family. Senor
Guilherme, a son of Senor Miguel, was also presented to me, and a number
of other gentlemen who happened to be at the house when I entered. I
escorted Senhora to the canoe-landing, giving her my arm, as I had
learned this act of civility was viewed much in the same light as with
us. All that was said by either was mutually understood, and my prospect
for getting on in my communications with intelligent, educated people,
is far more encouraging than in my intercourse with the caipiras with
whom I have been for several days past in coming across the country.

I was accommodated in the huge family canoe, which had a covering of
raw-hide, and all were comfortably protected for the voyage of ten
miles.

The negro with the other canoe, in charge of my baggage, was directed by
Senor Miguel to follow us.


                                              MONDAY, _January 8, 1866_.

Requesting Senor Guilherme to write a note of thanks for me to Senor
Manoel Joaquim da Rocha, for the service rendered by the man and the
canoe in bringing me down the river, they were dismissed this morning at
an early hour to return to Iporanga.

Having learned definitely that Senor Street has left this section, I am
thrown upon my own resources in making any exploration of the lands,
and, as Senor Miguel seems very kindly disposed, I have accepted his
invitation to remain a few days for the purpose of looking around the
country.

His dwelling and all its appliances present an air of substantial
comfort, and even of elegance in some respects. The parlor is a large,
well-furnished apartment, and has a piano of the bureau order, which is
very fashionable in this country. His wife performs well upon this
instrument, and has also the accomplishment of speaking French and
Italian, though she has forgotten most of her English. She is very
sprightly, and appears quite young for the wife of a gentleman of
fifty-five years, as I take Senor Miguel to be from his appearance. He
is originally from Spain and retains much of the harsh accent of that
country in speaking the Portuguese, so that I do not understand him with
the same facility as I do his wife or his son. The only fruit of the
present marriage is one pretty little girl, who is quite a prattler. By
a former marriage he has this son and two others, one a lawyer at
Ignape, and the other a Catholic priest at Bahia.

Senor Miguel has at this place extensive machinery with water-power, for
treating rice and sugar-cane, from the latter of which the rum (cachaça)
is the chief yield, as it is found to pay better than the sugar or
molasses.

I was struck with the convenience of his rolling scaffolds for sunning
the rice, there being three or four of different elevations, so that one
goes under the other, and each having its separate track, they can be
compactly stored under a house or drawn out to be exposed to the sun. A
similar plan to this would be well suited for drying coffee, yet nothing
of the kind was seen in the coffee establishments, and they should
profit by the suggestion. Upon these a few of the women and children
about the house can draw out or run under shelter, as may be required, a
large amount of rice or coffee.

There is also a saw-mill in operation here which seems to be of long
standing, and has a perpendicular saw that works rather slowly.

The water-power used for these several purposes is a stream of no great
magnitude, that comes into the Ribeira at this point, and by throwing a
dam across some short distance above, he secures sufficient water for
his purposes.

The residence and other buildings are located upon the bank of the river
within a short distance of the water, and sundry large canoes supply the
means of transportation to and from this place, which is called
Caiacauga.

These canoes are of various sizes, made out of a solid log of wood. The
one in which we all came down last night is forty-five feet long,
thirty-two inches deep and thirty inches across the mouth. But there are
others larger than this in all respects, and some measuring three feet
across the mouth.

The largest canoes will carry ten thousand pounds of freight upon this
river, and are worth about one hundred dollars; those of eight thousand
pounds capacity may be bought for ninety dollars; while those of five
thousand pounds capacity are valued at fifty dollars. From this down to
the size capable of carrying two men and their baggage, the price ranges
even as low as five dollars. This is found to be a very economical means
of transportation, and those who employ their canoes for the public
charge but twenty cents per head from Xiririca to Ignape, a distance of
between ninety and one hundred miles. The steamboats adopt the same
scale of rates; and from Ignape to Rio de Janeiro the rate of
transportation is forty cents per head, making the entire freight from
Xiririca to Rio de Janeiro only sixty cents per head when transported by
water.

In comparing this with the table of published rates from Santos to Rio
Claro, or any of the interior towns in the direction of Araraquara, it
is found the latter is two dollars and forty cents per head without
including the further item of shipment to Rio de Janeiro from Santos. So
much for the difference of water and pack-mule transportation. We may
reasonably calculate that the transportation to Rio from Araraquara will
be five-fold greater than from Xiririca, even when the line of railroad
is completed from Santos to Campinas. The pack-mules being placed on the
upper part of the line will continue to exact a heavy tariff before
articles reach the cars, and the rate of freight by railroad must exceed
very much that by water.

This matter is of great consequence in the profits of a crop; and while
many articles are entirely precluded from market, by the rates of
transportation on pack-mules from the interior of this province, even
coffee and cotton cannot be forwarded to any advantage, except when the
prices of these commodities are very high. On the other hand, there is
scarcely any thing marketable which could not afford to pay the freight
from Xiririca and leave a margin of profit; and all that is saved upon
coffee and cotton is clear gain to the planter in this region.

The Ribeira de Ignape is navigable for steamboats of light draught at
all seasons up to Xiririca, and at the ordinary state of the water,
during the rainy season, those drawing eight feet can pass up it. The
part affording least depth of water is at the mouth, all other parts of
the river, being very favorable for navigation.

It runs very smoothly opposite the site of Caiacauga; and in passing
down a few miles this afternoon, I was impressed with its special
adaptation for navigation.

I visited, in company with Senor Miguel, the farm of Senor Manoel
Roberto de Almaida, about two miles down the river; and though being
under cultivation, it interested me greatly.

Cotton of American seed had been growing four years without pruning, and
yielded two crops a year. The present prospect for a crop is fair, and I
counted an average stalk having forty-two grown bolls upon it, while an
isolated stalk had eighty-five bolls. I saw a very large stalk of cotton
separate from the planting of the field, where it had ample space to
spread, which must have had, at the least calculation, two hundred
bolls.

This is the first specimen seen which has been growing for such a length
of time, and it has not even been cut off, as most of the plants have
been, which are more than one year’s growth. The appropriateness of this
climate for the continuous production of cotton from a single planting
during four years, is illustrated by a considerable field growing in
this place; and apart from being arranged in rows, it affords but little
evidence of attention. The land is evidently inferior to most of the
surrounding territory, and yet it is of that dark gray order, with an
admixture of coarse gravel, that is usually best adapted to the culture
of cotton. The recently planted cotton also looks well, and if it was
cultivated properly, would doubtless far exceed the yield of that which
has been on the land four years.[30]

Coffee trees of great age were seen here still bearing some fruit, and
younger trees, with a full crop of the berries, indicated a climate well
suited to this article. This man is eighty-five years old, and has a
sister ninety years old living in this neighborhood, giving good
evidence of the healthfulness of the country.


                                             TUESDAY, _January 9, 1866_.

I came down the river this morning in a canoe with Senor Miguel and his
son, to his plantation at Ponto-Grosso, a distance of forty miles from
Caiacauga. The rain was falling most of the time of our descent, and
prevented me from seeing much of the land or crops on either side of the
river. The few patches of corn seen did not present a favorable aspect,
but having no information as to the period of its planting, I could not
judge correctly of it.

We landed at a sandy beach, and breakfasted upon the abundant supplies
brought with us; and dined after our arrival, having taken eight hours
to make the trip.

The Rio Inquia enters the Ribeira eight miles above here, and adds
greatly to the amount of water, so that it bears a striking resemblance
to the Mississippi river, in the character of the stream and the general
aspects of the adjacent country. It is a magnificent body of water, and,
with the exception of a single small steamboat, is only navigated by
large canoes, which transport the products along its margin to Ignape, a
distance of forty miles below this point.

The lands along the banks of this river are covered for the most part
with a most luxuriant growth of the copine grass, which is relished
greatly by cattle, horses, and mules; but it is so succulent that it
does not seem well for drying so as to make hay, and the land is too
valuable to be left open for pasturage, so that very little of it is
made available.

The soil of the river bottoms is a dark ash color, of a fine loamy
consistence, and of great depth, so that it does not become exhausted by
cultivation; and corresponds (so far as my limited knowledge of the
lands of the Mississippi enable me to speak) very much in all respects
to the Mississippi bottoms.

Upon visiting a field where cotton and corn are planted, the former was
found to be growing too luxuriantly, and will be likely to make a large
stalk without affording a good yield. The stand was irregular, and had
been but partially supplied by replanting and transplanting. This last
process is entirely new to me, and though not resorted to in the
Southern States, it has a fair prospect for success here in the rainy
season. The importance of having the stand of cotton all as nearly of
the same age as practicable, and getting it forward during the wet
months, will warrant the trouble, if it is found to succeed well. It is
demonstrated that the plant takes root and grows, but how it may thrive
or yield subsequently is yet to be tested. It has not been tried by any
other person who I have met in Brazil, and has been resorted to in
compliance with a suggestion of Dom Frederico Leopoldo Cesar Burlamaqui,
a writer upon the culture of cotton, whose paper was published in 1863,
with a view to induce the planters of Brazil to plant cotton while its
culture was suspended in the United States.

The corn is planted in rows, with five rows of cotton intervening, and
consequently too far apart for the pollen from the tassels to have its
full effect upon the silks. The ears are therefore not well filled with
grains, and the general size of the ears do not seem in proportion to
the large stalks. The white flint corn is planted here exclusively, and
the same seed has been used from time immemorial, so that a change of
the grain is perhaps now indicated for the improvement of the crop. Of
course the corn ought to be planted separate from the cotton, and the
rows being in closer proximity would secure a better result.

There has been a change made in the rice planted here, within the last
three years, and the superior quality of the yield over that of other
specimens is very evident. A part of the new supply was from Santos,
which is regarded an excellent place for rice; and another portion was
procured from South Carolina, the rice from that State being considered
the best of the world. Senor Miguel tells me the seed of the Carolina
rice yields more grains to the head, but not larger or better quality
than the other. The rice culture here is not confined to low lands, but
is mixed with corn and cotton by some persons in uplands. My friend has
at this place a rice-mill in operation, with a dozen mortars and
pestles, and cleans ten sacks of rice daily. This is a task assigned to
those working in the establishment, and they have to complete it before
stopping the mill. It requires it to go quite early, and continues until
after night, to accomplish the whole process.


                                          WEDNESDAY, _January 10, 1866_.

We set out this morning before breakfast and visited a field of corn
which was approaching the period of tasseling, and presented a vigorous
growth, though too much crowded in the drill.

A coffee field was next examined, containing twenty-five thousand
(25,000) trees of two years and younger which had been transferred from
a nursery. They were evidently retarded in their development by a
luxuriant crop of mandioca that surrounded the plants and shut out the
sun to a great extent; yet the most of them look in a healthy, thriving
condition, and some have blooms or a few berries of coffee. This coffee
is planted upon elevated land, and the soil is dark gray with a mulatto
base. These conical-shaped elevations are frequently observed here, and
stand out in bold relief to the general flat character of the land near
the river.

The mandioca presents an appearance very similar to the castor oil plant
when fully developed; and the root is the great source of farina which
is eaten by whites and blacks throughout Brazil. There are two distinct
varieties, one of which is very similar to the sweet potato, being eaten
in the same mode; while the other contains a poisonous juice which must
be expressed from the root before the solid portion is used for food.
This juice is said to be fatal to man or animal if taken in any
considerable quantity; and the presence of it to a greater or less
extent in some specimens of the farina is doubtless prejudicial to
health, and may perhaps be a source of leprosy in some instances
elsewhere.

The farina, however, when properly prepared from this poisonous root, is
found to be nutritious and healthy; and this variety of the mandioca
supplies most of the people with a substitute for bread. The roots are
scraped and grated by a machine, when the coarse powder is subjected to
compression under a screw to express the juice, after which the solid
portion is pounded in a mortar until reduced to a fine powder. This is
then dried in shallow pans over a furnace, and undergoes a cooking or
parching process that fits it for keeping in sacks or barrels for any
length of time. It is generally put on the table in this dry state, and
is mixed with almost every thing else that may be eaten, in the same
manner that we use bread.

Besides this, there is also a beautifully fine and white powder made
from the mandioca by a process similar to that of preparing starch; and
it is used for diet under the same circumstances that arrow-root is
employed with us.

The mandioca grows well upon this land, and yields without culture, but
should be allowed to remain in the ground from eighteen months to two
years to attain maturity.

One stalk, which was torn out of the ground this morning for me to
examine the roots, had twenty developments resembling sweet potatoes,
and the whole would have filled a peck measure, thus affording a most
abundant yield. It is propagated by cuttings from the limbs of the
growing plants, and these are planted so that the trees cover the entire
land densely and uniformly.

After breakfasting, the extensive new ground (roça) was visited. One
hundred and sixty (160) acres planted in cotton and twenty acres in corn
and rice present quite a promising prospect, though as yet nothing
definite can be determined as to the result. The cotton is all young,
but the most advanced looks well, notwithstanding there is in some parts
a considerable admixture of fern and poke-stalks, calling for the hoe,
and the dead trees are lying promiscuously over the ground. There has
been an attempt to plant in rows, but they are very irregular; and the
stand of cotton is in many places deficient, though it does not seem to
be the result of destruction by the ant as in other places.

All the work here is done with the hoe; and the planting is effected by
digging a hoeful of dirt, dropping five or six seed, and then covering,
at intervals of two feet, more or less.

This land is elevated and the soil dark gray, with an admixture of sand,
presenting very favorable conditions for cotton if the culture was
properly conducted.

The corn was yet young but flourishing, and is expected to yield without
farther work.

The rice is planted in the flats between the more elevated grounds, and
evidently will give an excellent yield.

Pine-apples were found growing promiscuously in different parts of this
plantation, and I had the opportunity of eating this most delicious
fruit to my complete satisfaction; and we started back with our canoe
well stocked with large, yellow, sweet-scented cones.

In returning I observed the settlements more than in descending, as it
was no longer raining, and there was a large number of dwellings on the
margin of the Ribeiro, having in many instances a rice-mill connected
with the establishment. These mills are moved usually by small streams
of water coming into the river from either side; and a prime object in
locating a residence is to be near one of these streams.

At the place where we stopped to eat our cold dinner, called Esterão da
Pedro, a pretty article of farina was made from the rice, and Senor
Miguel tells me the same is prepared at his house.

This article is used in its simple state or prepared in different forms
of bread. It is likewise used as a powder for the skin, and relieves
irritation of the surface in this warm climate. The rice is largely used
by all those people along the banks of the Ribeiro, and with fish
constitutes most of the food of many of the inhabitants. To this mode of
living is attributed the swarthy, lean, and haggard look of the
population in many places we passed; but there is little doubt of the
local influence from the lowlands adjacent to the river having much to
do in causing this impoverished and sickly appearance of men, women, and
children. All parties concur with Senor Miguel in stating that there are
but few cases of disease of any kind in this region; yet there is a want
of stamina in the constitutional structure that indicates something
unfavorable to health, and I should not like a location so low down on
the river, or so immediately upon its margin.


                                           THURSDAY, _January 11, 1866_.

Not being able to make the return trip, we stopped for the night at the
house of Senor Bento José de Morais, and spreading our bedding upon the
floor, remained until this morning. Taking a cup of coffee, we resumed
our ascent of the river at an early hour. The notable rock of the horse
(Pedra de Cavallo) soon came into view, and being on the dividing line
between Xiririca and Ignape, is a point of some interest.

It stands in the middle of the river and is supposed to bear a
resemblance to a horse.

Stopping at a house upon the bank of the river to eat the supplies
brought along for our breakfast, a clean place could scarcely be found
to spread our table-cloth. Senor Miguel proposed to the occupants to
remove some things from a table for our use, and such a nest of
cock-roaches as was broken up by the proceeding has rarely been seen in
a private dwelling.

As the mahogany-backs were scampering off in all directions, my friend
gave me a significant look, and when an opportunity presented, spoke his
opinion of the slovenliness and laziness of the people.

We were joined at the place where we spent the night by Senor José
Antonio de Silva, who has a small place above Xiririca, and he states
that the average crop of coffee from his trees is eight (8) pounds per
tree, and that he has gathered from one isolated tree as much as
thirty-two (32) pounds in one year. He says the crop in that
neighborhood is sure and of good quality.

It rained heavily during the afternoon, but we were thoroughly protected
by a covering of raw-hides.


                                             FRIDAY, _January 12, 1866_.

After enjoying a comfortable night in the hospitable mansion of my
friend, Senor Miguel, I went this morning with his son to set a gill-net
for fish, and thence across the river to gather some grapes. This
planting is made from cuttings of vines in the United States, and is now
bearing a crop of fine fruit. The vines are arranged upon a large wooden
frame, and appear vigorous and healthy, though upon the low land near
the river, which is certainly not a very favorable site for the grape
culture.

That celestial fruit, the jaboticaba, was also found growing in the same
locality, but only a few remained of the abundant crop which the trees
are said to have borne this year.

Several other varieties of fruit trees were seen, but it not being the
season of maturing, I had no opportunity to test their qualities.

On returning to the gill-net quite a number of small fish were entangled
in its meshes, and Senor Guilherme has since visited it again, getting
quite a full mess for the entire family. Some of them, called cascudo,
are a new order of fish to me, having a hard skin with scales like the
pike or gar, and a very large broad fin upon the back, spreading out
like a fan.

The sun was shining brightly during our walk, but it subsequently
clouded up and rained.

Senor Miguel showed me this afternoon a field in which cotton and
sugar-cane had been planted together, the crop of cotton being gathered
some months ago, and the cane being now cut so as to permit the cotton
to make another crop from the old stalk.[31]


                                           SATURDAY, _January 13, 1866_.

All things being provided for a tour of observation, Senor Miguel, his
son Guilherme and myself embarked in a large canoe at 9 o’clock this
morning, to ascend the Ribeira. The margin of the river on the way to
Xiririca presented many desirable locations which I had not been able to
see when coming down in the night. A short stop was made at the village,
where a letter was delivered to Senor Bernardo José Cabral, that should
have been presented on my first arrival. Other letters were left for
parties who were not at home.

On resuming our ascent of the river, a short visit was made to the farm
of Senor Francisco Alvares da Silva, where his interesting family
received us cordially, and one of his daughters gave us several pieces
of music on the piano. He regaled us with excellent grapes of various
qualities, the germs of which were imported from the United States. A
few stalks of cotton from American seed were growing finely in his yard.
But I was most interested in his coffee field, where trees from three
years to twenty years growth presented a most exuberant crop of berries,
and certainly present as good a prospect for a large yield of coffee as
any of the trees seen in the best regions of Campinas, Lemeira and Rio
Claro. These trees are growing in a sandy soil, upon a high bank of the
river, and there is an excellent crop of corn in the intervening space,
with good cane adjoining.

Our progress up the river enabled me to see again the lands on the
banks, which had been seen in my first descent, and further observation
impressed me even more favorably.

In many places there are hills extending to the margin, but in most
parts the land is elevated, with an extended plain, looking as if the
soil would be admirably adapted to cultivation. Corn, rice and
sugar-cane, with occasional small patches of coffee, were observed in
different localities, and this region seems not only well suited to a
variety of products, but also is admirably adapted for settlement. It is
high, and gives evidence of being healthy in the appearance of the
people living upon the margin of the river.

I have seen nowhere better specimens of healthy, vigorous development
than was presented by the daughters of the gentleman at whose house we
stopped, and the report given is unqualifiedly favorable to the
healthiness of the country and the pleasantness of the climate. Though
in the rainy season there is frequently wet weather for a few days, yet
even during this period there are intervals of clear, bright days.

The sun shone brightly upon us during most of the day, and though there
was a mere sprinkle late in the afternoon, it soon passed off and the
sky was again free from cloud.

The current, after ascending a short distance from Xiririca, becomes
more rapid, and though we had four stout negroes to man our large canoe,
it gave them heavy labor in using the poles. Upon making the suggestion
that it was severe work, the reply was simply that they were used to it
and did not tire.

It was after dark when we reached the mouth of the Inguary, and this
being the point of disembarkation, we stopped at a house for the night.


                                             SUNDAY, _January 14, 1866_.

Again, my dependence upon the arrangements of others induced a departure
from the proper observance of the Sabbath. The night had been spent very
comfortably, with the assistance of bedding brought in the canoe; and,
though I slept in an open shed or piazza, I was not annoyed either by
the bite or buzzing of mosquitoes; which gives a promise of exemption
here from this troublesome tenant of the forests. The temperature at
this point, which is twelve miles above Xiririca, is most delightful;
and I am reminded of the remark of General Waddy Thompson, in regard to
the table lands of Mexico, that a person having a coat would not care to
take it off, or if it was removed, he would not care to put it on again.
It is that genial state of the atmosphere which renders a person quite
satisfied with his situation. With the majestic Ribeira flowing at our
feet, and the beautiful island, to which allusion was made in my descent
from Iporanga, lying immediately opposite our place of lodging, relieved
by a green background of luxuriant corn upon the other side of the
water, this pleasant spot held out encouragement for a thorough
examination of the adjacent country. The soil near the bank of the river
is a dark loamy earth, that gives every indication of fertility. A field
of corn and also a patch of sugar-cane were seen growing near our
quarters, and presented a very flourishing condition.

The negroes at the place said there had been a small space planted in
cotton, but that the weeds and grass had overgrown it, so that it was
abandoned. Upon asking why they did not work it better, they seemed to
regard it as too troublesome to cultivate, saying “Não da lucro,” (it
does not give profit.) So much for their knowledge of the value of
cotton. A small specimen of cotton from a neighboring farm was brought
for inspection, which looked as if it might have been produced under the
same sort of disadvantages which induced the other to be abandoned, and
gave a very unfavorable impression of the cotton culture in this part of
the country. The land, however, is evidently well suited to the growth
of cotton, when it may receive proper attention, and fine crops have
been seen both above and below this point.

The animals which had been sent from Caiacauga across the country
arrived here this morning, and all the preliminary steps were taken for
proceeding into the woods. Two pack-mules were loaded with bedding,
cooking-utensils and supplies of various kinds; yet there were sundry
articles to be carried by the negroes, and among them a huge tin box
having cooked provisions, plates, tumblers, spoons, knives and forks,
&c., &c. I was surprised to see that even two wooden forks and a pole
were to be carried, for suspending a hammock at night, especially as our
expected tour lay through forests, where these things could be got when
we stopped.

Seven negro men and one negro woman (as a cook) accompanied us, to
subserve the various objects connected with the examination of the lands
and the care of the stock.

Before starting, we were joined by Senor Bernardo Antonio de Ramos
Moraes, who is the owner of the small house at which we quartered, and
resides a mile distant from the river. He has here a large body of land,
and another party adjoining him below has a considerable tract lying on
the river, both of which will be sold, if it is thought desirable to
secure a body of land in this locality, extending to the water.

The stream, known as Ribeirão Inguary, which enters the Ribeira de
Ignape at this point, passes through the lands of the above-named party,
and at a short distance, perhaps half a mile, from the Ribeira, there is
a fall in its channel, that would afford a very good site for any
machinery that might be desirable.

After passing through this land, we entered a body of land owned by
Senor Miguel, and encountered at the outset quite a hilly region, a part
of which has formerly been cultivated, and is now covered with a second
growth, (capoeira,) while there is at our place a field of fine corn,
which indicates quite a productive soil. This land is of a dark gray
aspect, with some large gravel, and would certainly yield cotton
advantageously, even where it has been once cultivated with the hoe only
and turned out. There is adjoining this territory, and lying in an angle
between two of its extensions, a portion of land occupied by a number of
small farmers, who live in close proximity to each other, having the
ordinary thatched houses of the country. If these can be secured on
reasonable terms, the houses might form the nucleus for a settlement,
and they are not more than three or four miles from the river, with a
very fair road.

After passing this populated valley, we traversed some lands belonging
to Senor José Alves de Moraes, which still lay irregularly, and the soil
assuming more of a yellow aspect, while the growth of the palmetto was
intermixed with the large forest trees to a considerable extent. On this
place there was seen a small patch of coffee trees, three years old,
heavily laden with berries; and, though the soil was rather sandy, it
seemed to be favorable to the growth of the coffee. It is certain that
nowhere else have trees of the same age presented a more favorable
prospect for a yield of fruit.

Leaving this, we again entered the territory of Senor Miguel, at a part
where the configuration is more regular, and approaches in many places a
level surface. It is an undulating plain, with slopes here and there of
more or less abruptness; and having plateaus of elevated level land, and
also flat low lands which lie along the stream, Aborbora, which runs
through this land. Besides this stream, there are other smaller branches
running into it, which serve to water all parts of the tract. But there
is not any site, which was seen on this portion of the territory, that
would be adapted to the use of water-power for machinery, and the
reliance for this region must be upon the water-power of the Inguary
lying between it and the port of shipment for products.

The quality of these lands varies greatly, presenting in parts great
fertility, and in others evidently of less adaptation to the growth of
the great staples of the country; while there is occasionally a small
portion of land that seems to have been to a great extent exhausted by
cultivation in by-gone years, and is overgrown with a long grass,
corresponding to our broom-sage grass.

The proportion of virgin forest and second growth could not be
accurately ascertained, but my impression is, that three-fourths of the
territory has never been entered by the axe; and in this, the Pon D’Alho
and Figaro Branco are of frequent occurrence, which are here considered
as indicative of the best soil. The timber is not of that enormous
dimension which was observed in some parts of the interior, nor do I
consider any portion of this land equal in fertility and durability to
the (terra rocha) dark purple lands of the inferior of the province. Yet
the soil and the growth upon it are well adapted to the purposes of the
agriculturist, and the facility for machinery, with the convenience of
navigation, are matters of much moment.

I saw young corn on a portion of the tract of Senor Miguel, last
described, which presented a good appearance, and also rice growing in
upland that looked very favorable. Some older corn examined did not
impress me as a good crop, though there was evidence of want of proper
culture. The beans had evidently not yielded well, and it was stated
that the time of planting by the tenants was improper.


                                             MONDAY, _January 15, 1866_.

Having spent the night at the house of one of the tenants of this
property, immediately upon the bank of a small stream known as Aborbora,
it was found that we were not entirely exempt from mosquitoes, as on the
night before, yet they gave us no trouble in the house whatever. This
stream is one of the branches that go to make up the Rio Jacupiranga,
and its name is applied to this territory, supposed to embrace two
square leagues of land, owned by Senor Miguel.

In leaving this house we ascended a short abrupt hill, and reached an
elevated plain which extended with only one depression for half a mile,
being in part covered with original forest, and presenting a dark
mulatto soil. A portion, which was cleared, had an excellent crop of
rice growing upon it, though there were low lands in the vicinity which
would probably have suited this article better; and this want of
judgment in arranging crops seems to be general among the people of the
class that become tenants in this way.

After passing this level region the land became hilly and even
mountainous at one point, making the ascent and descent difficult for
our animals. The soil upon these hills was inclined to a clay
consistence of a yellow hue, while the increase of the palmetto and
scrubby palm indicated an inferior quality of land. Yet, upon a slope of
one of these hills, corn was growing well in fresh land, while it was
looking badly in old land.

Upon a small creek called Ribeirão de Lagoa, a low, flat, dark-colored
bottom land spread out to some distance on either side, and the corn
seen upon it indicated a good soil. This stream would admit of
machinery, and there is sufficient fall near the point where it was
crossed to render the water-power available. It is clear and cool, so
that we enjoyed a draught of the water as much as if from a spring.

The house of another tenant was located near this stream, and he had a
small patch of coffee trees, that seemed to have been neglected,
presenting a very untoward prospect for a crop. The position being low,
is doubtless likewise an unfavorable condition, while the soil is not
here suited to their growth, being deficient in stamina.

In this place was seen a hedge of a scrubby, knotty tree with numerous
short, thick limbs that seemed well suited to exclude even hogs from a
field; and, as it grows from the cutting, an enclosure can be readily
effected in a few years.

There is also another small tree having thorns that is used for hedges,
and the enclosure so made is called “cerca de espinhos,” making an
effectual barrier.

Although these and other growths are available for enclosure of grounds,
hedges are not very often resorted to in the country; and in the campos
where the timber is wanting, large ditches are made at a great
expenditure of labor, whereas a hedge could be grown to answer every
purpose when only cattle and horses or mules are to be enclosed.

In this region of country, however, there is an abundant supply of
timber, and the only difficulty is to find that which is favorable for
splitting into rails.

After traversing the premises of another party, that contained the
poorest specimen of land seen since leaving the river, we proceeded to
an extension of the territory of Senor Miguel, which goes within four
miles of the town of Xiririca. There corn and rice were growing very
satisfactorily, and though most of the land lay unfavorably for
cultivation, those parts that are cleared have a comparatively level
surface.

Near this portion of the land a field of coffee, on the premises of
another party, presented a very encouraging prospect for a yield, being
generally loaded heavily with fruit. This was upon a steep hillside from
which the superficial soil had disappeared, and the mulatto clay
formation, which forms the basis of most parts throughout this region,
remained alone to support the growth of the trees. These elevated lands
are thought to be most favorable to the coffee.

From this point we retraced our steps for a few miles, and then
descended a stream called Braço de Gado for six or seven miles along a
low, flat, and broad bottom land, having elevated lands on each side. A
tenant occupies a house where we entered this territory, and there is
near by an extensive fall in the stream above-named, which would be
available for an overshot wheel of any desired size.

This point is particularly suitable for the location of machinery, as it
is but four miles from Xiririca, with a road already in use which could
be readily made to serve for wagons. It is, besides, near the direct
line of communication between this place and Cananea.

In the course of the Braço de Gado several small streams enter from each
side, affording water for the several humble families who occupy houses
at different points by the favor of the owner.

The ridges upon each side, approaching a mountainous elevation,
constitute the boundary lines of this property; and the breadth varies
from three to four miles, while the length is considered to be six
miles. The slopes of the hills on each side admit for the most part of
ready cultivation; and the soil being of a dark gray aspect with a
mulatto clay base, is adapted to all the staples, yet the most irregular
portions would be most appropriately used for coffee. I saw good corn
growing far up on the side of one of these slopes, and corn and rice
were also seen upon the level plain below, but was too young to
determine what would be the result.

This low land is generally level, and yet is not at all marshy, as the
stream has a deep channel below the surface of the ground with abrupt
angular banks, so that the water does not overflow except in immense
falls of rain causing a flood of water.

The earth is solid throughout this bottom, and the road firm and good,
except at the crossings of some of the small branches. With very little
work a fine wagon-road could be made extending along this stream on a
level route, communicating above with the road to Xiririca, or extending
below some four or five miles over the same kind of surface to the Rio
Jacupiranga, which is navigable with the largest canoes thence to its
mouth.


                                            TUESDAY, _January 16, 1866_.

We spent the night at the house of a mulatto man named Senor Bartholomew
da Costa; and having a heavy rain, the Braço de Gado was so full this
morning that it could not be forded without swimming. Notwithstanding
this flood of water, there were very few points at which it overflowed
the high banks, and yet it did not fall sufficiently during the day for
us to cross it, so that we remained at this place observing what was to
be seen about the premises of this gentleman of color.

A patch of coffee, having some two thousand trees, was examined, which
afforded a poor prospect of a yield. This was, in part, perhaps,
attributable to being planted with a southern exposure, instead of
facing towards the east; yet it is most likely that the soil is
deficient in those elements suited to the production of coffee.

Corn and rice were growing well in the flat land along the stream, but
most of it was too young to form a proper opinion as to the yield.
Observing that the rice was missing in various places, I was told by the
owner that it had been eaten by rats which live in the woods, of whose
voracity there is no reason to doubt; though this is the first time that
these rats have been heard of in the country.

Here it was observed that the cows were very much annoyed by a fly which
deposits its egg in the flesh and causes numerous points of irritation
in the skin. The same result ensues when they make a deposit in the
human skin.[32]


                                          WEDNESDAY, _January 17, 1866_.

Finding the Braço de Gado reduced again to its natural channel, we left
our imprisonment, enjoying another day as bright and clear as that of
yesterday, until late in the afternoon, when there was a slight shower
of rain. This body of land is the possession of Senor Miguel, and we
proceeded from it across the ridge towards the Ribeiro to examine
another tract owned by him, of a configuration and quality that is
better suited to agricultural operations than any of the territory thus
far seen. There is perhaps a square league of land in this lot; and it
combines original forest, secondary growth, and open cultivated fields.
A large portion of the original forest is well timbered, and not so
irregular as to prevent cultivation with the plough; but there is one
part that assumes a mountainous character and of course precludes
ordinary culture. On the crest of this elevation I was informed that
crops had been grown and that the soil was good, but I did not make the
ascent.

In the lands under cultivation I saw a few patches of corn, some of
which was growing well, while others indicated an exhausted soil as well
as deficient culture. At one small house where we stopped there were
rice and peas, which the negro tenant had grown on the place; and at
another there was a considerable lot of corn. There is upon this place a
site where a large rice-mill was formerly in operation, and might be
made available again for machinery. I found the effects of the fly upon
the skin of cattle here also, and any quantity of mosquitoes in the
wood.


                                           THURSDAY, _January 18, 1866_.

After a tour of five days and a return to the comforts of home, Senor
Miguel announced this as a day of rest for us; but a few points may be
adverted to in connection with my past observations upon the
surroundings of this place.

This section of country about Xiririca is exempt from local or epidemic
diseases, and the general constitutional stamina of the population
indicates vigorous health. Goitre and leprosy, which are found in most
other sections, are unknown in this region. The climate is free from
that oppressive heat which prevails in higher latitudes, and which is
observed in less elevated localities.

The atmosphere is also free from fogs or any other undue dampness. I am
here in what is known to be the rainy season of this country, and
setting out from the homestead of Senor Miguel Antonio Jorge on
Saturday, the 13th inst., we ascended the Ribeira de Ignape for
twenty-five miles, and during the entire day the sun was shining
brightly, and only a mere sprinkle late in the evening for a few
moments. On the following day we crossed the range of hills at right
angles from the river, proceeding some eight or ten miles, and again the
sun shone brightly all the day without any thing more than a light
sprinkle late in the afternoon. On the third day we traversed hills and
valleys on a line parallel with the Ribeira for a distance of fifteen
miles, and still the sun shone brightly throughout the day with no signs
of rain until night. On the fourth day the sun beamed forth again, and
the brightness of the fifth was only marred by a sprinkle in the
evening.


                                             FRIDAY, _January 19, 1866_.

My friend Senor Miguel Antonio Jorge arranged that his son, Senor
Guilherme, should accompany me to-day to visit the lands lying between
our former route and the river. Setting out with a guide from Caiacauga,
we proceeded nearly four miles upon the road by which we returned from
our former tour, and then diverging to the right hand, we passed through
a portion of land lying favorably, and with good soil. This is located
upon a stream which forms the line of division between the territory
which Senor Miguel proposes to sell and that of his home place.

This stream further up has a good site for machinery, which is located
upon lands of Senor João Franco, that will be disposed of if they are
desired. This point would serve a good purpose in regard to much of the
land, which is best suited for agricultural operations, yet it is six or
eight miles from the Ribeira, upon which shipment must be made.

With a view to accommodate the products of these lands, Senor Miguel
proposes to donate land for a depot on the river below his residence, to
which point there is a practicable route for a road, which is now in
use.

After passing the mill site to which allusion is above made, we ascended
a very steep mountain, and the descent was equally steep on the other
side, so that this soil, though presenting a favorable aspect, is not
likely to be in requisition for cultivation.

Leaving this elevation we visited a coffee field of Senor Francisco de
Paula, upon the slope of a high hill. The trees were generally about six
years growth, and consequently at that age when the yield should be
best, yet the crop was by no means good, while the size and appearance
of the trees was unfavorable.

Whether the nature of the soil or the manner of planting may be the
cause of the failure, I could form no definite opinion.

Immediately at the villa of Xiririca a field of coffee, with fifteen
thousand trees, belonging to Senor João Franco, gave a much more
encouraging prospect for the culture of coffee.

These trees are for the most part four years old, and while larger and
healthy, they were loaded heavily with fruit, presenting by far the most
favorable aspect of any trees of the same age that have been seen
anywhere.

Here seems also to be an exception in the growth of the coffee tree upon
the level plain near the river, and although the bluff is high, so that
there is never an overflow of this land, yet it is what is usually
denominated as bottom land with us.

It has been alleged that in this whole region of country, the coffee
plant does not bear but a few years, when it declines, or even dies.

But in the ground adjoining these trees, some antiquated trees, supposed
to be fifty years old, are still standing, without any special
indication of decay, and I have seen elsewhere very old trees bearing
fruit.

There seems nothing in the nature of the soil, or the character of the
climate throughout this region, to preclude the proper growth of coffee.

On our route to-day several fields of corn were passed, which presented
a fine prospect for a yield, and especially did the crops of corn look
well near the road as we approached the villa. I am not fully prepared
to give an opinion as to the result, from simply seeing a vigorous
stalk, before the ears are formed, but enough of the crop is now earing
to afford a guarantee of a good yield, and with improved culture, corn
will most assuredly turn out well.

The road leading into the villa from the lands previously visited had
been reached by us before, some four miles from the villa, and now the
exploration of it was continued.

The route upon which the road is located is very favorable for the
construction of a good wagon-road, and by this line of communication the
products of the lands belonging to the tracts of Aborbora and Braço de
Gado could readily be brought to the villa of Xiririca for shipment.

There are lands belonging to the public domain in close proximity to
these private lands, of which I have a very favorable report from
Captain Buhlaw, formerly an officer of the engineer department in the
Confederate service, and now employed by the Brazilian government to
survey these lands. In connection with a portion of this territory first
examined, and lying nearest the river, I expect to effect a provisional
arrangement with the government of Brazil for such an extent of public
land as will accommodate those families who look to me for a selection.

These private lands lie almost parallel with the course of the river, at
a distance of from four to six miles from it, and their products may all
reach this navigable stream either at Xiririca or Caiacauga; while those
located higher up, and extending to the Ribeira de Ignape, have a direct
shipment by canoes. The latter may deposit their cargoes at Xiririca for
the steamboat, or make the trips entire to Ignape, as is done at present
by many of the planters.

There are other private lands which may be secured, of similar quality
to those described, and so situated as to communicate readily with the
Rio Jacupiranga, which is navigable with the largest size of canoes into
the lower part of the Ribeira de Ignape.

The largest portion of these lands being owned by Senor Miguel Antonio
Jorge, he proposes, if it is desirable, to arrange with other parties
for the transfer of these lands, so as to bring all into one compact
body, which would enable our people to divide this territory more
advantageously among themselves, and to exclude those who might not be
desirable neighbors.

A paper has been received from this gentleman, in which the price of his
land is fixed at eighty-eight cents per acre, the houses with straw
covering going with the land, while those with tile roofs are to be
valued separately. It is specified that the payments be made in three
equal instalments, at the end of the third, fourth and fifth years from
the date of the purchase, and the whole without interest.

Should any one desire to anticipate the time fixed for payment, a
discount of six per cent. per annum for such years as the amount was to
remain unpaid will be allowed upon receiving the payment. It is also
stated that his large fazenda, containing about one square league of
land, located immediately upon the banks of the Ribeira de Ignape, will
be sold if it is desired. This place is known as Ponto-Grosso, and is
only forty miles above the town of Ignape, with every facility of
machinery and buildings that would be requisite for a large business. A
notice of it will be seen under the record of the 10th inst. The price
fixed for this place is ten thousand (10,000) dollars, with the same
time and conditions as specified for the other lands.

There is, likewise, another place immediately upon the river some
fifteen miles above this fazenda, where cattle are at present reared,
and, though not in cultivation, presents an elevated regular outline
with indications of fertility. This tract of land has a front on the
water of perhaps three-fourths of a mile, and a depth of two miles, yet
the exact measurements of this, as most of the land in this region of
country, have not been as yet ascertained. If Ponto-Grosso should be
sold this would likewise be disposed of, but not otherwise, as it is a
stopping place in passing from Caiacauga to the above-named fazenda.

As there are no cotton-gins introduced along this river, and a
considerable amount of cotton now planted, Ponto-Grosso would be a
favorable location for an extensive ginning establishment, or even for a
cotton factory.


                                           SATURDAY, _January 20, 1866_.

My friends of Caiacauga having treated me throughout my sojourn here
with the greatest possible kindness, Senor Miguel and his very
accomplished wife, Donna Maria, walked with me to the canoe-landing this
morning, to give me their best wishes upon leaving their house. The
noble hospitality of these people exceeds any thing I ever expected to
realize among strangers, and, apart from any interested motive, I
believe it affords them a satisfaction to contribute to the enjoyment of
a guest.

It being arranged that my young friend, Senor Guilherme, would accompany
me, we embarked at 11 o’clock A. M. with two sturdy negro fellows to
paddle us down the river; and making a pleasant voyage, we reached
Ponto-Grosso at 6½ o’clock P. M.

An ample stock of provisions had been supplied by my hostess for the
entire trip to Ignape, consisting of chickens, fried fish, boiled rice,
excellent bread, farina, bananas, figs, and pine-apples. In addition to
these, we were supplied with a kind of beefsteak, enveloped in eggs and
fried, so as to afford a most palatable dish. Having partaken freely of
our stores on the way, a cup of coffee was all that I cared to take upon
arrival, though Senor Guilherme insisted upon having a warm supper
prepared.

Previous to visiting this region of country, nothing could be learned
definitely in regard to its adaptation to the growth of the staple
commodities, corn, cotton, and coffee; but my observations lead to the
conclusion that each of them may be produced here advantageously.

Corn has been heretofore one of the principal articles of export to
Santos and Rio de Janeiro; and, in the form of big hominy, is used to a
considerable extent in the country. But corn bread is not known here,
though the farina is frequently made when that of the mandioca is not at
hand. The white flint corn is the only kind which is planted, and though
the ears are not large, it seems to be a sound, good grain.

The common white corn is said to be much more liable to injury from
weevils than this hard variety; and the yellow or red corn is not found
so marketable in the form of big hominy, which is dried and shipped in
large quantities. A change of seed and improved culture would doubtless
secure better results in the growth of corn.

Cotton has been grown in this region by a few persons for several years,
with results that are conclusive as to the favorable yield, and yet
systematic culture is requisite to test fully the quality and quantity
that may be produced in these river lands. Should the improved
appliances and the skilled labor of the Southern States be applied to
the culture of cotton here, I am satisfied the yield will exceed that of
the lands in the United States; and it is likely that the amount of
cotton grown in Brazil within a few years will affect very much the
markets of the world. The labor of production is materially lessened by
its continuous growth from the same stalk, which is annually cut off and
yields again full crops.

Coffee has been seen here in lands of various kinds, and of all ages,
presenting the most favorable indications of an abundant yield. The
coffee produced in former years presents also the characteristics of a
good, sound grain; and I am informed that the average yield of trees
equals what was stated elsewhere to be a full crop on the best lands.

Several patches of coffee trees have been seen that did not afford a
prospect of good results; and it is evident that a selection of location
is a matter of moment here, as it is found to be even in the districts
where coffee is most successfully cultivated.

The same kind of discrimination is necessary in determining what
localities are suited to the growth of other articles, and a neglect of
such precautions leads to a failure in the crop of either.

Rice is recognized as a certain and prolific product of all this region,
but more especially of the lower section where lands become flat and
moist. Mandioca yields abundantly.

Beans, which are more prized in Brazil than any other provision crop,
are found to yield well in the lands visited, and though some specimens
of failure have been observed, this has, for the most part, been
satisfactorily accounted for by planting out of season or other
departure from good farming. An abundant crop of sugar-cane, oranges,
bananas, figs, and grapes, with a most excellent quality of pine-apples,
makes up a variety of products which renders this a desirable land for
the settlement of those who seek a home in Brazil.


                                             SUNDAY, _January 21, 1866_.

Rising before day my young friend had all our baggage deposited in the
canoe, and fresh eggs, with hot coffee and bread were in readiness when
I was summoned from my bed. Partaking of these “fresh eggs,” etc., we
resumed our voyage down the river, and I found this was not to be
regarded as breakfast, but with the addition of two entire chickens to
our supplies for the trip, we breakfasted at 9 o’clock A. M., and dined
at 4 o’clock P. M. on the water.

We had as fellow-passenger a young porcupine, (ouriço,) that one of the
negroes was taking down to sell as a pet; and finding that he was
testing the quality of our figs, the negro guardian was called upon to
secure the ugly little varmint at one end of the canoe.

We passed during the forenoon the mouths of the Rio Jacupiranga and the
Rio Paricoera, on the latter of which I was told there are quite a
number of inhabitants. Shortly after mid-day we passed through a canal,
or cut through a neck of land, about one mile in length, which saved us
four miles in the natural course of the river. The difference of level
in the Ribeira is so slight at the entrance and outlet of this
artificial communication, that the current through it is feeble, and
instead of washing out it is gradually filling up from the repeated
rises of the river, and our canoe had great difficulty in passing. The
negroes labored hard, and one of them got out several times to push the
canoe through the mud; but they worked with a good will, under the
promise of a drink of rum at the close. Both had previously taken off
their shirts, and with the confined air of this narrow channel, the
mosquitoes, and the hard pulling, their bodies and arms were covered
with perspiration before reaching the open water of the river. After
getting their drink, and resting a short time, they proceeded as usual
again.

Another canal was encountered at no great distance, cutting off another
bend of the river, but it was much shorter, and there was no difficulty
in the passage. On approaching the city of Ignape there is a very large
artificial channel, in which a small steamboat passes; and being very
straight, with the water running in the direction we came, it made a
very pleasant trip of over a mile, to the immediate precincts of the
city bridge.

We stopped with the brother of my young friend, Senor Dom Miguel Jorge
Montinegro, who is keeping house in bachelor style, and places his
establishment at my disposal in a way that relieves me of all
embarrassment.

In descending the Ribeira it was observed that the corn did not present
so good an appearance as it had done above, and in most places the banks
were very low, so that the general surface of the land must be submerged
in the floods of the river. When approaching the city the water spreads
out into various channels, over an extensive area, again bringing up the
resemblance to the Mississippi river near its mouth.

The tainha, a fine fish which frequents these waters at this season, was
seen leaping up into the air to a distance of three feet.


                                             MONDAY, _January 22, 1866_.

Having met the Rev. Ballard Smith Dunn, of Louisiana, at the hotel last
evening, we found many topics of interest in rehearsing what had been
seen by each of us in this country, and have spent this day together. He
is acting in behalf of a number of families who desire to be informed in
regard to Brazil, and has visited a portion of the provinces of Rio de
Janeiro and Esperitos de Santos. He was favorably impressed with the
inhabitants, and found some fine lands, yet did not conclude that it was
desirable to locate in that region. He is now investigating the lands
upon the tributaries of the Ribeira, and considers the soil adjacent to
the waters of the Rio Jacupiranga of excellent quality, with a very
promising prospect for crops of corn in most parts. In passing through,
from the colony of Cananea, he reports that very fertile lands were
seen, and he hopes to find in this region a desirable location for his
friends. He will ascend the Rio Paricoera, and also the Rio Inquia;
which latter affords an encouraging field for examination, as it is
likely to be the line of communication with the great iron-works of
Epanema. If he should recommend some portion of this territory for a
settlement of people from the Southern States, it would strengthen very
much my conviction of the advantages likely to accrue from a location in
the vicinity of Xiririca, as it is extremely desirable that our people
should be as far as practicable associated together.


                                            TUESDAY, _January 23, 1866_.

Being detained to-day in Ignape, awaiting the arrival of the steamer, to
proceed to Cananea, I may note some points connected with this port of
entry. It is located upon a low flat point of land, with a rugged
mountain ridge rising up at a short distance from it, and the whole is
surrounded by water. With a low land extending up from the city, along
the Ribeira for a considerable distance, it is not a matter of surprise
that the place is reported to be unhealthy, and recently there has been
a very serious epidemic, bloody flux, prevailing, attended with
considerable fatality, but has now ceased.

There is a very large church in the process of completion, at a central
point of the buildings in the place; and the abandoned walls of an
immense jail that was supposed to be in demand some years ago, but the
improved morals of the population, or the want of resources, induced
them to leave it unfinished. There are but few houses of two stories,
conforming to the type of most of the interior towns in having one-story
buildings.

The general appearance of the population does not give a favorable
impression of their physical stamina, or their intellectual status, yet
I have met several gentlemen of refinement and cleverness, among whom I
may especially mention Dom Antonio Joaquim Rodrigues, Juiz de Direita,
and my young friend Dom Miguel Jorge Montinegro, who holds the position
corresponding to our District Attorney, or Solicitor for the State. The
latter speaks some English, and we got on very pleasantly, in his snug
bachelor’s retreat, during my stay.


                                          WEDNESDAY, _January 24, 1865_.

Leaving Ignape during the forenoon, in the Dom Affonso, we steamed along
the inland sea, known as Mare Pequeno, and really the Bay of Venice
cannot present a scene of more simple beauty than this placid sheet of
water.

Several cozy-looking dwellings are located very near the margin, and the
borders are fringed with green foliage, while here and there an islet is
slightly elevated above the surface, and to complete the picture,
water-fowls of various plumage are seen either resting upon the water or
flying around with evident surprise at the presence of our little
intruder.

In the course of the afternoon a heavy rain drove us from the deck into
the cabin, and as the shades of evening were closing around us, the
steamer reached the villa of Cananea.

Shortly after anchoring, Senor E. H. Street came aboard, and took me
ashore to spend the night. We called upon Captain Buhlaw and lady, and
also Mr. Hanson and lady, living in the same house. They are favorably
impressed with the suitableness of the country for their future
residence; and arrangements are already completed by those two
gentlemen, for the location of a saw-mill upon the river Guarahu, five
miles above its confluence with the Rio Jacupiranga, which proceeds
thence thirty miles into the Ribeira de Ignape.

We took tea with these Southern people, and while sitting in that little
social group, unfettered by any political domination, my thoughts turned
anxiously to the fate of those who remained in the South.


                                           THURSDAY, _January 25, 1866_.

We breakfasted with our Southern friends, and relished it the more for
being prepared by the hands of the ladies. Mrs. Hanson is quite a young
woman with one child, and seems prepared to take life as she may find
it, saying that she only wants now to get a place fixed where she could
have her own garden, and raise her own poultry, to feel entirely
independent.

Mrs. Buhlaw does not seem to adapt herself so readily to this border
style of living, yet she is cheerful, and hopeful of the future.

These families are sojourning only temporarily here, until arrangements
for their accommodation are completed at some distance in the country.

The villa of Cananea is one of the oldest settlements in Brazil, the
fleet of Martin Affonso de Sonza having landed at this place, August 12,
1531, and placed upon the island of Abrigo, at an elevated point known
as Morro São Joas, two stone pillars, which are still to be seen.

This island upon which the villa is located is at the outlet of the
long, narrow body of water, which we traversed in coming from Ignape.
Though the mouth of the Ribeira leads out to the ocean, opposite to the
city of Ignape the bar is so shallow as to preclude the passage of
vessels in that direction, so that they are required to come through
this Mare Pequeno, a distance of forty-five miles, for an outlet; and,
if going towards Rio de Janeiro, must return along the coast the same
distance, to reach the point from which they might proceed directly if
the mouth of the river could be made navigable.

In view of this circuitous navigation, it is very desirable that a good
wagon-road should be constructed from Xiririca across the country to the
port of Cananea near the main land. I am informed by Senor Street and
Captain Buhlaw that the route is very favorable even for a railroad;
while the port is capable of admitting, with good protection, vessels of
the largest size. The largest extent of public lands lies south of this
proposed road, and products might be conveyed along it either to
Xiririca or to the port of Cananea, as might be most convenient.

The epidemic bloody flux, which visited the city of Ignape, is now
prevailing in Cananea, and has been attended with great fatality, more
especially among children. In one family as many as eight persons have
died in one month, and a number of deaths have occurred in other
families. But the population have now to a large extent left the villa
and gone into the country, where they are entirely exempt from the
disease. The absence of a means of proper treatment has doubtless added
very much to the fatal results, as there was no medical man residing in
either of these places, and though a doctor is paid now by the province,
and medicines furnished to him for the treatment of the sick at Cananea,
there is but little confidence reposed in his skill or his integrity and
faithfulness.

Regarding this epidemic as a transient disease, confined to these
populated localities, it does not augur any thing unfavorable to the
healthfulness of the country.


                                             FRIDAY, _January 26, 1866_.

Having resumed my voyage upon the Dom Affonso, Senor Street and myself
were reduced to the necessity of sleeping upon the table in the small
cabin, with all the apertures closed on account of a fall of rain. In
addition to the crowded condition of the berths by whites, and others
slightly tinged, there were several negro women of the real ebony stamp
sleeping upon the floor, and with the confined air, charged with
emanations from various accumulations during the night, our situation
was little short of the Black Hole of Calcutta. I will say, however, for
the general management aboard of the small and antiquated steamboat,
that it was very satisfactory; and though the table does not compare
with that of the Santa Maria, every thing is well prepared and clean.
The large number of persons aboard indicates that a better boat with
larger accommodations is needed upon this line, which makes a trip
monthly, touching at the points upon the coast as far south as Santa
Catharina.

Upon entering Santos we found the English steamer Galileo loading for
Rio de Janeiro; and as the passage is likely to be more expeditious as
well as more comfortable, Senor Street and myself with two or three
other passengers have arranged to go in this vessel to-morrow morning.
She is consigned to Mr. W. T. Wright.

Since my former visit, Mr. and Mrs. Wright have been favored with a
daughter, which is now a month old; and she is again doing the duties of
her household with her customary grace and kindness.

I am indebted to my friend, Mr. Wright, for collecting the following
valuable data pertaining to this city and province, as well as the whole
empire of Brazil.

  _Mean temperature of city of Santos, by R. J. de Balbi, Inspector of
         Port; transferred from Centigrade to Fahrenheit scale._

      Month.             1863              1864              1865
 January                 83.62             80.67           No record
 February                82.40             78.67               „
 March                   78.83             80.38               „
 April                   77.03             74.28               „
 May                     69.92             72.59               „
 June                    68.11             68.89               „
 July                    67.17             67.98               „
 August                  66.32             66.23               „
 September               68.39           No record             „
 October                 71.65               „                 „
 November                74.78               „               75.49
 December                78.22               „               78.45

The only practical distinction here is, into cooler and warmer season,
but the classification is made and the months will be thus arranged into
seasons:

Summer.—December, January, and February.

Autumn.—March, April, and May.

Winter.—June, July, and August.

Spring.—September, October, and November.

The highest temperature is about 90°, and the lowest is about 60°
Fahrenheit.

The summer months constitute the rainy season, and the winter months the
driest part of the year in most of the territory of Brazil.

The government of Brazil consists of the Emperor and his Council, the
Senate, and House of Deputies, acting under the constitution.

The cabinet is formed as that of Great Britain; one man being
commissioned by the Emperor, selects his portfolio and colleagues, he
becoming president or premier of the council. The members are ministers
of the empire, of foreign affairs, of finance, of war, of the navy, of
justice; and under one head, of commerce, agriculture, with public
works; making seven departments.

Senators are balloted for by electors, the three highest being forwarded
to the Emperor, who selects one to fill the office, which is held for
life. It is not requisite that he shall be a resident of the province
for which he is chosen. Deputies are chosen every four years by
electors. The Emperor can dissolve any congress and call for a new
election as in Great Britain.

There is a judge for each district, and two terms of court each year. In
trial by jury, the decision is by plurality, and grade of punishment
according to majority.

Courts of appeal at Bahia, Maranhão, and other places, while there is a
supreme court for higher offences. There is no grand jury, but process
formed by delegado or sub-delegado of police, (corresponding to sheriff
and deputy,) and if there is reason found for trial, indictment is sent
to the municipal judge, (corresponding to magistrate,) and if approved
he sends it to the district judge; and when approved by him, the case is
ordered for trial before the jury. Magistrates elected by the people.

In addition to delegado and sub-delegado appointed by the President of
the province for each district, there is a chief of police for each
province appointed by the Emperor. Each province has its own
legislature, chosen by the people. The President has veto power, which
may be set aside by a two-thirds vote.

One archbishop residing at Bahia is the chief see, and there is also a
bishop for each province, and a vicar in each district.

One mint at Rio de Janeiro, and the Bank of Brazil, with sundry others,
is also located there; while there are branch banks in various provinces
for issue, and private banks for deposit and discount.

Schools and colleges are numerous. A law academy in São Paulo, and also
in Bahia. A medical college in Rio de Janeiro.


                                                     _January 27, 1866._

Senor Street and myself came aboard of the fine steamship Galileo at 10
o’clock A. M., but the vessel was detained a considerable time by a
hawser becoming entangled in her screw.

A man was brought from the city by her agent, Mr. W. T. Wright, who
dived down under the wheel, and remaining over a minute under the water,
succeeded in disentangling the cable.

This vessel is the second English steamer that has recently taken
loading from this port, under an arrangement effected by Mr. Wright for
the permission of coastwise freight by foreign bottoms, in consideration
of the large proportion of Brazilian vessels now chartered by the
government in connection with the belligerent operations against
Paraguay. The troops of Lopez have now been withdrawn from Brazilian
territory, and yet hold a defiant attitude upon the soil of Paraguay. It
is now the purpose of the Emperor to conquer a peace with these
troublesome neighbors, and it is generally thought that hostilities will
soon be successfully ended.

The Galileo has taken aboard here nineteen hundred and fifty-two (1952)
bales of cotton of the small size, weighing one hundred and twelve (112)
pounds, some of which stop at Rio de Janeiro, while another portion is
for shipment to Liverpool. She brought from Montevideo a partial cargo,
consisting of two hundred sheep, and all the appurtenances of the
slaughtering of cattle, hides, horns, and bones, amounting to some five
hundred tons.

The sheep and a portion of the cargo are shipped for Rio, while the
remainder goes to England.

This vessel has excellent passenger accommodations, and the table is
served differently from that of the Brazilian steamers, the waiters
supplying promptly all the wants of the guests in the former, while in
the latter passengers are expected to look after their own wants during
the meals. In the fare of Brazilian steamers, table wine is included,
while on the English vessel all wines, beer, or liquors are a separate
item of charge, and there is a margin of two (2.00) dollars difference
in the rates between the Santa Maria and the Galileo, the passage on the
former being eighteen (18.00) dollars, while that of the latter is
sixteen (16.00) dollars.

We find on board Captain Markam, the master of the unfortunate Herschel,
that was wrecked below a short time since. His vessel first struck upon
a rock not indicated in the charts, and was so badly damaged that all
preparatory steps were taken for the safety of the passengers and crew
in the boats. But he still had a hope of getting her into the port of
Marlausdo, and placing her under the direction of a pilot she was run
upon a rock a second time and was lost, all on board being saved.

An English gentleman named Stickney, who was aboard of the Herschel, is
now a passenger with us, and has been examining some of the territory of
Brazil, with reference to farming and sheep-raising. He is much pleased
with some of the country, but has not yet made any selection. I infer
from his own statements, that he has been conducting quite an extensive
business in this department in England, and it would be very desirable
to see some of those experienced farmers entering into that neat and
systematic style of business in this country.


                                             SUNDAY, _January 28, 1866_.

The harbor of Rio de Janeiro was entered to-day at 1 o’clock P. M. Being
hailed at the fort and boarded by three different officials of the
Brazilian government, our vessel proceeded to her anchorage, and I
reached the wharf at 3 o’clock P. M. My quarters are taken again at the
Exchange Hotel, and having a small bed-room, with an open hall in front
that is well ventilated, I am likely to have a quiet time for preparing
my report to the Minister of Agriculture pertaining to my tour of
observation.

Making a hurried inquiry at the office and other places for letters,
none were found, and I proceeded in a boat to a bark that had recently
arrived from New York, thinking it might bring some tidings of my family
or friends. I was not permitted by the custom-house officers to go
aboard, as the vessel had not yet been passed with her cargo; but upon
speaking with the Captain from the row-boat, he informed me that any
letters brought had gone to the post-office, under the existing
regulations, two days ago. I knew, therefore, that nothing had come for
me.


                                             MONDAY, _January 29, 1866_.

The entire forenoon was occupied with my report for the minister, and it
was only suspended when the announcement was made that the United States
packet Havana had arrived in the harbor. Being informed that no one was
permitted to go aboard while she was still in charge of the custom-house
officers, I awaited the arrival of passengers and learned that there
were no people aboard from the Southern States, so that there was no
prospect of hearing through anyone from my friends.

Mr. G. N. Davis kindly accompanied me to the post-office, and personally
examined the letters received by the packet, but nothing was found for
me. This inscrutable interruption of all communication with my friends
in the South leaves no other alternative than to return and confer with
them in person respecting my impressions of the territory, climate,
productions and government of Brazil.

Senor E. D. Street has arranged for a meeting with the Minister of
Agriculture at 11 o’clock A. M. to-morrow.


                                            TUESDAY, _January 30, 1866_.

The abstract of my observations upon the soil and industrial resources
of the country, examined during the past four months, was embodied in a
report of thirty-two pages of large letter paper, and presented to his
Excellency, Conselheiro Paulo Sonsa, Minister of Agriculture, Commerce,
&c., to-day. My interview was very brief, as he had an appointment
elsewhere, which prevented him from giving audience to numerous persons
in attendance, and he appointed day after to-morrow for another meeting.
In the mean time he can examine my paper and be prepared to make a
response to the propositions therein submitted.

On my return I called at the office of Dom Galvão, where he was found
with his secretary, Mr. Mello. These gentlemen renewed their offers of
assistance in any way they could serve my objects. But no satisfactory
information has been received in regard to the terms upon which negroes
may be hired from the province of Minas, and I will direct my efforts to
procuring another class of laborers.

I am informed by Mr. William Scully, the editor of the _Anglo-Brazilian
Times_, that he has had frequent applications from parties in England,
Scotland, and Ireland, in regard to securing employment for laborers
from those countries; and that so soon as we can give him any assurance
of the number that will be required for business operations among our
people who propose to settle in Brazil, he can certainly secure them for
the service.

Being constantly occupied during the entire morning, I did not have an
opportunity to get my breakfast, and, when it was nearly one o’clock, I
went into the Café Americano for a lunch that could be most promptly
served. Cold ham, shrimps and salad, with bread and butter, stayed my
stomach; and yet it proved to be a very costly repast, as a fine silk
umbrella was left in the establishment which could not be found upon
returning to look for it some two hours afterwards.

In compliance with previous invitation, I dined to-day with Mr. Malone
and his family, who are keeping house in the precinct of São Domingos.
Mr. J. A. Roussel, from Louisiana, went over with me on the ferry-boat,
and I met at the house Dr. D. Dansereau, also from Louisiana, and Mr. P.
B. Hockaday, an old gentleman from Missouri, all of whom are here to
select locations for their future residence. The latter two are
accommodated with boarding by Mr. and Mrs. Malone, and seem to be
pleasantly situated. This lady looks rather delicate, and yet she is
doing the cooking and housework for the family with her own hands, and
says that she is too busy to think of troubles or cares, feeling quite
cheerful and contented with her situation. They have two very
interesting little daughters, one about nine years old, and the other
about seven. Their health has improved since coming here, and they are
now quite hearty and sprightly. This family reached Brazil some six
months ago, and found many trials at the outset from the want of
associations with any of their own people, and the failure to find any
field of business in which they could be employed to advantage. But now
they are in good spirits, and expect ere long to identify themselves
with others who are expected to arrive from the Southern States, and
form a settlement in some part of the country. In their present sphere
of duty, they render essential service to those stopping in Rio.

When I sat down with Southern friends, at the table of a Southern
family, and partook of the food prepared by the hands of a Southern lady
in a foreign land, the change which has come over our people was fully
realized; yet this presented a type of the independence to which every
Southern heart aspired, and which can only be enjoyed now by a
separation from those who hold us in subjection.

On returning upon the ferry-boat, I was introduced to Mr. Franklin and
Colonel Parsons, of Texas, who are here for the purpose of locating in
the country. The latter gentleman is just recovering from a slight
attack of varioloid, contracted from some Brazilian soldiers on board of
the vessel coming from Bahia to Rio. The former has also been indisposed
for a few days. But both are again ready for business, and they are now
making arrangements to open a mercantile house in this city for
furnishing machinery and agricultural implements. They expect to be
provided with every thing that is likely to be wanted in opening
plantations; yet it will be desirable for planters to bring with them
all they may need.

The family of Mr. Gunter, from Alabama, with that of his son-in-law, are
located in Botafogo, and await his return from an exploration of the
country to determine upon a location. They have been very kindly
assisted and looked after by that noble-souled friend of Southerners,
Mr. Carlos Nathan. His acts of kindness will relieve the embarrassments
of many who have received favors at his hands, and among that number I
shall always feel thankful for the gentlemanly courtesy and substantial
aid which he has extended to me.

With a view to promote in a more enlarged sphere the emigration of our
people, a proposition has been submitted to the Brazilian government by
Mr. Nathan, in which arrangements will be made by him for the
transportation of persons from the Southern States to Brazil, with the
privilege to the emigrants of paying the passage-money in three
instalments, at the end of the third, fourth, and fifth years, and
without interest. He assumes the responsibility of guaranteeing to the
government the payment of these passage bills which it is to receive,
giving him bonds for the amount, with the allowance of a certain amount
for each emigrant that is thus brought from the United States to Brazil.

No action has been taken as yet upon this practical business
proposition, which would systematize the transportation across the
ocean, and enable many to accomplish the removal to Brazil who otherwise
will not be able to avail themselves of transportation.

A highly important meeting of citizens was held to-day at the hall of
the Merchants’ Exchange, at which the Minister of Agriculture and other
important officials co-operated with many of the most influential men of
the city, for the consideration of measures most likely to promote
emigration to Brazil.

Two meetings have been held prior to this, and propositions were
submitted by Senor Dom Furquim d’Almeida, which have in view the
recognition of all the civil and religious privileges which can be
desired by our people in coming into this empire. This gentleman has
great worth of character, and exercises much control in the affairs of
the country, so that his prominent advocacy of these reforms has secured
the concurrence of a large number of important persons, and through this
influence it is expected that action of the government will be secured.

An organization has been formed to-day with the object of facilitating
all the different steps towards settlement in this country; and with a
view to reach more adequately those for whose benefit it is designed,
foreigners are to be associated with Brazilians in a committee for
carrying out the plans of this society.

Few matters are initiated here by a public assemblage of the people,
such as that now witnessed in regard to emigration, and it indicates a
widespread and abiding conviction of the importance that is attached to
the settlement of the Southern planters in the territory of Brazil.

The official authorities have manifested great readiness to receive
favorably all of our people who have sought any position in connection
with the government; and they have afforded all the facilities
practicable for aiding those who desired to examine the resources of the
country, while they hold out the encouragement of prospective assistance
to such as may need aid in emigrating to this empire with their
families.

The people everywhere exhibit likewise the most cordial disposition to
favor this movement.


                                          WEDNESDAY, _January 31, 1866_.

A brief summary of the report submitted to the Minister of Agriculture
will give a general view of the field of observation.

For the purposes of description, the following division of soil is
recognized: Volcanic earth, (terra rocha,) red land, (terra vermilha,)
dark land, (terra preta,) and light land, (terra branca.)

A further distinction results from the predominance of clay, sand,
shell, and decomposed vegetable matter. These are combined in various
proportions with other elements, in different specimens of soil
examined.

The territory is divided into original forest, (matto virgem,) secondary
forest, (capoeira,) and open plain, (campo.)

The soil of the forest is superior to that of the plain, and yet has
many grades.

Fruits and medicinal plants found to a large extent in some of the open
plains.

None of the native trees of the United States are found growing in the
forests examined.

The province of São Paulo may be divided into four different sections,
as follows:

1st. Coast land, including the land lying between the sea and the
neighboring serra adjacent to Santos, Conceicão, Ignape and Cananea.

In this the soil has rotten-shell combined with sand to a large extent.
Rice is the chief product of this region.

2d. Table land, including the territory lying south of the Serra Nigro,
and lying adjacent to Campinas, Lemeira, Rio Clara, Araraquara, Brotas,
Jahu, and Botacatu.

The best purple soil (terra rocha) is here in close proximity to the
poorest light sandy plains, and, while the latter are unproductive, the
former are considered the most favorable for coffee and all the standard
staples of the country.

3d. Mixed land, including the territory lying between the former and the
Serra da Cubitão, and lying adjacent to Jundiahi, São Paulo, Itu, Porto
Feliz, Sorocaba, Itapetininga, and Paranapanema.

Extensive grass plains are intermixed with forests of light land, and
occasionally dark soil.

The former very suitable for grazing stock, and the latter are giving
very favorable results in the culture of cotton and corn.

4th. River land, including the territory lying upon the upper waters of
the Ribeira de Ignape, and its tributaries from each side, and being
adjacent to Inquia, Iporanga and Xiririca.

Forest land prevails here exclusively, having for the most part a dark
soil with a yellow clay base. Corn, rice and sugar-cane have been the
principal products, yet this region is well adapted to the growth of
tobacco, cotton and coffee.

In all of these sections, the different tropical fruits, oranges,
bananas, pine-apples, &c., grow to great advantage.

The hoe is alone used in the culture of the land, and only three plows
were seen in the entire province. The introduction of the plow is likely
to improve the agricultural operations, and may serve to eradicate that
great pest of the planter, the ant. It is especially needed in the
preparation of the soil for cotton, and the increasing importance of
that crop is apparent.

Pack-mules are the reliance for transportation of product to market,
from section second and third, for the present. But a railroad line is
expected to be in operation soon, which will be available for a portion
of each of these sections. It runs from Santos to Jundiahi, eighty-five
miles.

Communication with a market, by water, is convenient for sections first
and fourth. The former affords no inducement for any large settlement,
while the latter presents a wide extent of territory, lying between the
Ribeira de Ignape and Cananea, and extending towards Parana. If it
should meet the views of our people to concentrate upon this territory,
a large wagon-road is desirable to connect Xiririca and the port of
Cananea, so as to afford them access to either of these ports.

The route indicated is pronounced by an engineer to be very favorable
for the location of a good road, and if it is authorized, it will
constitute an important item in the advantages of this section, for the
settlement of emigrants from the southern portion of the United States
of America.


                                           THURSDAY, _February 1, 1866_.

In an interview with his Excellency Conselheiro Paulo Sonsa, Minister of
Agriculture, &c., I have received his assurance that a wagon-road should
be opened from the port of Cananea to Xiririca; and that the requisite
order would be issued forthwith for setting apart the funds for this
work. He has likewise given me a promise that an amount of public land,
sufficient for the accommodation of my friends, would be reserved in a
specified locality, until I should communicate to him some definite
intimation as to their decision. I am farther informed that authority
will be given me to hire a vessel at the expense of the Brazilian
government, for the use of the needy, provided two other vessels are
loaded by emigrants on their own account; and that the vessels would be
permitted to land their passengers and cargoes free of duty, at Cananea
or Ignape, if this is desired.

With this understanding, I feel that my mission in Brazil has terminated
satisfactorily, and I am now ready to submit the result for the
consideration of those who await this report.

The physical aspects of Brazil present great encouragement to those
desiring to engage in agricultural operations.

The great variety and superior quality of the products present
advantages not to be realized in the United States, and the facility of
cultivation, with the prospect of improvement under the more thorough
treatment of the soil to which our people are accustomed, renders this
branch of business particularly attractive.

The manufacturing resources afforded by the water-power which is in
almost every section of the country, afford the opportunity for working
up much of the material grown upon the soil, and enterprise may speedily
put to work spindles and looms even at points remote from the great
lines of transportation. To our Southern people the empire of Brazil
embodies the character and sentiment among the better class of citizens,
very much in keeping with our standard of taste and politeness. It has
grown out of the consciousness that worth makes the man, and doubtless
connected with the same relative status of races that was formerly a
line of distinction between the black and white population with us.
Though slavery may be destined to cease in Brazil at some future day, by
gradual emancipation, yet the elements of society which have resulted
from the mastery of the white man will never be erased entirely from the
people. There is a dignity and a hospitality among these people that
correspond in many respects to the lofty and generous bearing which
characterized the Southern gentleman in former times. We find people in
Brazil capable of appreciating the Southern character, and ready to
extend a cordial greeting to all who come.

I HAVE SOUGHT AND FOUND THEM A HOME.




                               CONTENTS.


              TITLE                                     1
              INTRODUCTION                              3
              Hunting a Home in Brazil                  5
              Temperature approaching Rio               6
              Harbor Defences                           7
              Examination of Passports                  8
              Entrance into the City                    9
              The Streets of Rio                       10
              Mules and Equipages                      11
              Omnibuses—Negroes—Ferry Boats            12
              Post-Office Regulations                  13
              American Acquaintances                   14
              City Improvement Company                 15
              Gas-Lights of City                       16
              Custom-House Business                    17
              Negro Carriers                           18
              Dinner at a Restaurant                   19
              Brazilian and other Ladies               20
              Amusements                               21
              Inducements for Immigration              22
              Representations as to Southern People    23
              Information from American Residents      24
              Bay of Paranagua                         25
              Visit to Museum                          26
              Curiosities                              27
              Visit to Museum                          28
              Curiosities                              29
              Trip to the Suburbs                      30
              English Church Service                   31
              Disregard of the Sabbath                 32
              Audience with Minister of State          33
              Call upon Mr. Crenshaw                   34
              Stroll in Fashionable Street             35
              Dress—Umbrellas                          36
              The Ferry                                37
              Signal Telegraph                         38
              Public Buildings                         39
              Statue of Dom Pedro I                    40
              Interview with Minister of Agriculture   41
              Facilities for Prospecting               42
              Necessary Arrangements                   43
              Large Slaughter-House                    44
              Departure for Santos                     45
              Custom at Meals                          46
              Instruction in Portuguese                47
              Use of Cigarettes                        48
              Fort and City of Santos                  49
              Visit to Mr. Wright’s Family             50
              A Country Ride                           51
              Coffee Plantation                        52
              Advantages of Santos                     53
              Ride in Diligence                        54
              An Enchanting View                       55
              Railroad Wanted                          56
              Ant-Hills                                57
              Ancient Carriage                         58
              Letter to Mr. Sampson                    59
              Brazilian Newspaper Article              60
              An Offer of Land                         61
              President of Province                    62
              Friendly Assistance                      63
              Rev. Mr. Blackford                       64
              Our Interpreter                          65
              Hospitality of Friends                   66
              Family Worship                           67
              Elegant Bath-house                       68
              Visit to Law School                      69
              Outfit for our Trip                      70
              Preparations Completed                   71
              Catholic and Protestant Cemeteries       72
              Brick-Yards                              73
              Presbyterian Service in Portuguese       74
              Religious Toleration Anticipated         75
              Set out with Interpreter                 76
              Tunnel at Cachoeira                      77
              Railroad to Jundiahi                     78
              Surroundings of Jundiahi                 79
              Lint of Pina Tree                        80
              Coffee Culture near Campinas             81
              Simple Mode of Cleaning Coffee           82
              The “Monjolo”                            83
              Visit to an Elegant Establishment        84
              Dining-Room                              85
              Ride to Fazenda—Remarks                  86
              Management of Coffee and Corn            87
              Varieties of Timber                      88
              Machinery of “Settequéda”                89
              Despolpidor for Coffee                   90
              Fanning Machinery                        91
              Process Similar to Rice Cleaning         92
              Meeting with a Brazilian Physician       93
              No Introduction between Strangers        94
              The “Chigre”                             95
              Specimens of Carving                     96
              Female Apparel                           97
              Outfit of Camarada                       98
              Pleasant Weather                         99
              Plateau Land                            100
              A Magnificent Fazenda                   101
              European Colony                         102
              Coffee-Cleaning Establishment           103
              Steam Saw-Mill                          104
              Extensive Coffee Plantation             105
              Cotton Culture                          106
              Advantages of Brazil                    107
              Large Trees—Rich Soil                   108
              Cotton of a Fine Quality                109
              Early Marriages                         110
              Reception at Rio Claro                  111
              Long Mill-Race                          112
              Senor Vergueiro’s Fazenda               113
              Land of Inferior Quality                114
              Seclusion of Women                      115
              Medium Coffee and Cotton                116
              Barren Campo—Sterile Region             117
              Numerous Coffee Trees                   118
              Early Ride to River Rock                119
              Proposal of Sale of Lands               120
              Elegant Hospitality                     121
              Saint-Poles—Negro Ceremonies            122
              Use of Shackles for Slaves              123
              Burning off Lands                       124
              Contracts with Negro Agents             125
              The Contract System                     126
              How it Operates                         127
              Extensive Lands for Sale                128
              Advantageous Site for a Village         129
              Parting from Friends                    130
              Scarcity of Corn                        131
              Recently-Opened Fazenda                 132
              Varieties of Fruit                      133
              Clothing of Negroes                     134
              Fertile Lands—Water-Fall                135
              Lands in Market                         136
              Villa of Araraquara                     137
              Reception at São Lorenço                138
              Clarifying Sugar                        139
              Large Profits from Sugar                140
              Medicine—Apothecary                     141
              Hunt on Sunday                          142
              A Friend in Need                        143
              Studying Portuguese                     144
              Richest Lands not Best for Cotton       145
              Large Stock-Farm                        146
              Native Cows not Good for Milking        147
              Lands on Rio Jacaré                     148
              Lightning-Bugs                          149
              Large Yield of Cotton                   150
              Join General Wood’s Party               151
              Address of Welcome                      152
              Reply by Dr. Gaston                     153
              Extensive Fazendas for Sale             154
              Lands of Serra of Good Quality          155
              The Macucu—Droves of Cattle             156
              Map of Lands near Araraquara            157
              Sumptuous Entertainment                 158
              Oranges for Wine                        159
              Absence of Requisites for a City        160
              Woodlands of Lageado                    161
              The Ant-Eater                           162
              Embarrassing Situation                  163
              Reception at Brotas                     164
              Hospitality of its Citizens             165
              Singular Road-Guide                     166
              A Hungry Party                          167
              Latin Terms in Medicine                 168
              Anniversary of Marriage                 169
              Thoughts of Home                        170
              Apprehension for Welfare of Family      171
              Assistance to Guest in Mounting         172
              Dwelling and Kitchen Together           173
              The Ligarto                             174
              Quality of Land on Rio Jahu             175
              Neat Fencing                            176
              Navigation of River Tieté               177
              Accommodations for Sleeping             178
              Lands between Rio Jacaré and Tieté      179
              Climbing a Tree under Difficulties      180
              Valuation of Land in Different Sections 181
              Brood Mares and Colts                   182
              Healthfulness of Country                183
              Preparation for Feast of Holy Ghost     184
              Correspondence with a Warm Friend       185
              Personal Appreciation of Col. Lorenço   186
              Parting with our Best Friend            187
              Unpleasant Travelling                   188
              Arrival at Rio Claro                    189
              A Day with Dr. Gattiker                 190
              Trouble from Loss of Mule-Shoe          191
              Value of Horses and Mules               192
              Value of Different Articles             193
              Varieties of Useful Timber              194
              Specimens of Native Grass               195
              Large Dinner Party                      196
              Addresses—Toasts                        197
              Water of Streams for Drinking           198
              Return to Campinas                      199
              Dinner Party at Campinas                200
              Complimentary Addresses                 201
              Awkward Blunder                         202
              Music and Refreshments                  203
              German Colony                           204
              House of Entertainment                  205
              Arrival at Cachoeira                    206
              Difficulties of Railroad Construction   207
              The Lost Trunk                          208
              Audience with President                 209
              Emigration Society Organized            210
              Cross on the Roadside                   211
              Fazenda Bananal                         212
              Comfortable Dwelling                    213
              Romantically-Situated Lake              214
              Rare Combination of Beauties            215
              Courtesy by a Stranger                  216
              Arrival at Santos                       217
              Attend Theatre with Friends             218
              Soldiers—Sea-Sickness                   219
              Return to Rio Janeiro                   220
              Dinner at Botafogo                      221
              Arrival of a New Southern Delegation    222
              Handbook for Emigrants                  223
              Hospitality at Caju                     224
              Report to Minister of Agriculture       225
              Introduction of Friends                 226
              Arrangement for Further Investigation   227
              Antagonism to Slavery Increasing        228
              Tannery in São Christovão               229
              Butchering Establishment                230
              No General Market in Rio                231
              Botanical Garden                        232
              Collection of Rare Specimens            233
              Government Agent to Accompany us        234
              Shopping in Rio                         235
              Cheap Ferriage                          236
              Examination of Site on the Beach        237
              Ascent of Monteserrate                  238
              Arrangements Complete for Conceicão     239
              Oldest Settlement in Brazil             240
              A Novel Turnout                         241
              An Original Idea for Progression        242
              Pedestrian Performances                 243
              Dreary Abode at Conceicão               244
              Visit to an Old Convent                 245
              Ascent of River in a Canoe              246
              Vagabondism has Few Cares               247
              A New Remedy for Debility               248
              Sample of Lands and Products            249
              Trade for Otter Skins                   250
              Cargoes for Approaching Festival        251
              “Paying the Piper”                      252
              A Brazilian Gentleman                   253
              High-Pressure Postilions                254
              Almost a Disaster                       255
              Reconnoissance of City Lots             256
              Lime-Factory—Tannery                    257
              Tanning not Neat, but Profitable        258
              Examination of a Coast Farm             259
              Attractive Site on Beach                260
              Collision Growing out of Slave-Trade    261
              Brick and Tile Factory                  262
              Favorable Report of Cananea             263
              Free Travel—Sporting Students           264
              Ascent of Inclined Plane                265
              Difficulties of Railroading             266
              Religious Tolerance Conditional         267
              Wet and Dry Seasons                     268
              Free Land to Emigrants                  269
              Missionary Operations                   270
              A Catholic Priest Converted             271
              Ordination by Presbytery                272
              Prospective Extension of Railroad       273
              Pack-Mules Laden with Cotton            274
              Arrival at Itu                          275
              Fine Collection of Fruits               276
              Good Site for Machinery                 277
              Extensive Quarry                        278
              General Use of Tooth-Picks              279
              Cheap Rents at Porto Feliz              280
              An Intelligent Mulatto Priest           281
              The Negro Taint                         282
              Iron-Works at Epanema                   283
              An Opening for Capitalists              284
              Good Quarters at Sorocaba               285
              Non-observance of Christmas             286
              Pleasant Evening-Party                  287
              Whips and Riding Outfit                 288
              Campos and Cultivated Slopes            289
              Goitre and Leprosy                      290
              Town of Itapetininga                    291
              Cotton-Gin by Leg-Power                 292
              Corn, Cotton, Potatoes                  293
              Manure Advantageous                     294
              Stock-Farm Enclosure                    295
              Report from Major Meriwether            296
              Land on the Road to Lençoes             297
              Festivities of New Year’s Eve           298
              Sad Thoughts                            299
              Kindness of a Catholic Vicar            300
              Procession of Our Lady of Conception    301
              The Priest’s Family                     302
              Females Riding Astride                  303
              Leaving Paranapanema                    304
              Aspect of the Country                   305
              Bedbugs Rare—Fleas Plenty               306
              Dodging the Recruiting Officer          307
              Backwoodsman’s Dwelling                 308
              Table Arrangements                      309
              Sleeping Accommodations                 310
              Peculiar Custom after Eating            311
              Leather Breeches Don’t Tear             312
              Hunting Stray Mules                     313
              A Night in the Forest                   314
              A Sliding Scale of Travel               315
              Most Excruciating Roads                 316
              Limestone, Lead and Iron Ore            317
              Killing Cobras                          318
              Plan for Descent of River               319
              Deficient Cotton Culture                320
              Coffee Trees—Rice-Mill                  321
              Salubrity of Climate                    322
              Fish—Scenery                            323
              Regular Dug-Out Canoe                   324
              Speaking Portuguese                     325
              Rolling Scaffolds—Saw-Mill              326
              Cost of Travel by Water                 327
              Cotton of Four Years Growth             328
              Ponto-Grosso—Cotton and Corn            329
              Successful Transplanting of Cotton      330
              Change of Rice Seed                     331
              Mandioca of Two Kinds                   332
              Cotton Grown without Ploughing          333
              Rice and Fish for Food                  334
              Nest of Mahogany-Backs                  335
              Fishing with Gill-Net                   336
              Special Examination of Lands            337
              Healthfulness of Locality               338
              Beautiful Country                       339
              Fine Water-Power                        340
              Coffee Trees Heavily Laden              341
              Forest Lands—Mosquitoes                 342
              Mountainous Aspect of Country           343
              Hedges—Timber Abundant                  344
              Braço de Gado River                     345
              Wood-Rats—Troublesome Fly               346
              Original Forest—Secondary Growth        347
              Absence of Rain for Five Days           348
              Land for Depot Tendered                 349
              Favorable-Looking Crops                 350
              Terms of Sale for Private Lands         351
              Noble Hospitality at Caiacauga          352
              Large Production of Corn                353
              Location for Growing Coffee             354
              Artificial Channel near River           355
              Interview with Mr. Dunn                 356
              Epidemic at Ignape                      357
              Southern Families at Cananea            358
              One of the Oldest Settlements           359
              Very Fatal Bloody Flux                  360
              Temperance of City of Santos            361
              Government of Brazil                    362
              Mints, Banks, Schools                   363
              On Board a Steamship                    364
              Again in Rio Janeiro                    365
              Preparing Report of Observations        366
              Boarding-House by Southern Family       367
              Warehouse for Agricultural Implements   368
              Generosity of Mr. C. Nathan             369
              Measures to Promote Immigration         370
              Divisions of Soil and Territory         371
              Transportation—Communication            372
              Agricultural and other Resources        373
              Character of Brazilians                 374
              Contents                                375

-----

Footnote 1:

  The adoption of a British flag by this ship-owner during the progress
  of the war enabled him to continue sailing upon the high seas, and his
  sentiments being known to the confederate cruisers, secured one of his
  vessels from destruction, that fell into their hands.

  As vessels of Great Britain and the United States are more largely
  occupied in navigating the high seas than those of other
  nationalities, it is the custom of those meeting upon the ocean to
  hail in English, and there is scarcely a captain in charge of a vessel
  of any nation that is not sufficiently acquainted with the English
  language to communicate in this way with another.

  The code of signals used by the English have been adopted by all
  nations navigating the waters of the Atlantic and Pacific; and thus
  vessels communicate with each other upon any matter desired, without
  being in speaking distance.

Footnote 2:

  This discount upon United States money is practised very often upon
  strangers by those occupying other positions than hucksters, but a
  dollar in gold or silver coin of the United States will command two
  millreas of Brazilian money in most respectable business
  establishments of Rio de Janeiro, and is generally valued at this rate
  by exchange brokers. Upon this standard one dump is worth two cents,
  and I should have received twelve dumps and a half for my quarter
  instead of the ten which were given. It will save the reader who may
  go to Rio more than the price of this book, to keep in mind what is
  stated in this note.

Footnote 3:

  Captain Lee informs me that in August, 1864, there sailed from Bahia a
  vessel containing over one hundred of these liberated negroes in
  families, men, and women, and children, who were bound for Africa,
  with the expectation of remaining in that country. They expressed a
  hope of being able to exert a favorable influence upon the natives,
  and it would be a very interesting part of their history to know
  whether they have lapsed into barbarism or have improved those with
  whom their lot is cast in Africa.

Footnote 4:

  This gentleman has since ceased to be the chief engineer of the
  railroad, and his brother now occupies the position.

Footnote 5:

  This admirable disinfecting establishment was subsequently visited.
  The materials are pumped from the reservoir, which is below the level
  of the water, and subjected to the action of various articles, among
  which I recognized alum, lime and charcoal, after which a deposit of
  the solid portions is formed in receptacles of immense proportions.

  The fluid being acted upon by these agents, and then filtered, is
  rendered so entirely free from impurities that we were informed the
  superintendent drank some of it on the occasion of a visit by the
  Emperor, to illustrate the perfection of the process of disinfection.
  Delicious draught, no doubt!

  There is no unpleasant smell about the place, and the remaining solid
  matter is employed as a fertilizer, without any of the disagreeable
  concomitants of poudrette.

  The building is an elegant stone structure, and the operations are
  conducted by steam, under the immediate control of the English
  contractors, who are known as the city improvement company.

  The gentleman in charge stated that this was an entirely new process,
  and that it has not been introduced elsewhere.

Footnote 6:

  A sack of coffee weighing one hundred and sixty pounds is carried in
  this way without any apparent inconvenience, and most of the loading
  of vessels from the warehouses near the wharf is performed after this
  manner. The negroes usually move under such a burden in a brisk walk,
  or more frequently in a trot; and a number being employed, the work
  progresses very rapidly in putting a cargo of coffee aboard a ship.

Footnote 7:

  I am indebted to Captain E. A. Lie, the intelligent master of the
  vessel in which my return passage was made, for some interesting
  particulars in regard to Pompeii, which he visited in 1857. His
  statement is as follows:

  “The mass of volcanic matter which overlies the site of the former
  city of Pompeii is principally ashes, and on the borders has undergone
  such changes, that fields are in cultivation upon the spot.

  “The explorations are entirely under the directions of the Imperial
  Government, and a guard is kept constantly over the place, so as to
  prevent any one from appropriating articles that may be discovered by
  those engaged in the work.

  “The streets are so contracted that even the narrow vehicles of that
  period were unable to pass each other, and hence some of the
  thoroughfares are supposed to have afforded passage in one direction,
  while others were passed in the opposite direction. The deep cuts in
  the stone paving of the streets indicate that there was much passing
  of carriages or carts for a long period.

  “Connecting with the side-walks there are stones elevated above the
  general level of the streets, upon which persons might step and avoid
  water that was flowing in the street. There are no signs of drains or
  sewers to be seen, nor of aqueducts.

  “Those bodies remaining in the houses at the time of this wholesale
  burial are completely petrified, and black as ebony, a number of which
  are preserved in all their perfection of form. There are also
  petrified specimens of fruits, of bread, even with the baker’s name
  imprinted on it; of beef, of pork, and of various viands that were
  ready for eating.

  “A large number of precious stones have been recovered, and among them
  an immense convex emerald, of great value, which was discovered in a
  tomb, supposed to contain the body of some very important dignitary.
  Many rich treasures have been found in the cemetery, evidently lodged
  with the dead in their last resting-place.

  “There are evidences of much taste in the architectural department,
  and specimens of very elaborate workmanship have been discovered. The
  amphitheatre was evidently a grand structure, and with the base below
  the general surface of the earth, it is arranged with ascending rows
  of stone seats for the accommodation of a large assemblage. All the
  buildings are of stone.

  “There is an extensive museum at Naples, which contains all the
  varieties from this reservoir of antiquarian relics; and to make the
  tour of this establishment, with a proper examination of these
  articles, and others of interest collected there, requires two weeks
  of unremitting observation.”

Footnote 8:

  Captain Buhlaw received an appointment similar in rank to that held in
  the confederate service, and has been charged with the survey and
  mapping of the public lands near Cananea. In this service Mr. Mallory
  is associated with him under appointment of the government.

  In regard to the tender of an appointment to the writer, the length of
  time occupied in the examination of the country precluded any other
  duty.

Footnote 9:

  After the return of the Emperor from the seat of war, he and the
  Empress were seen in their coach, with six horses and a number of
  outriders. She endeavored to return the courtesies of those on the
  street by an almost incessant series of motions of the head from side
  to side, while he maintained an attitude of dignified complacence.

  The horses are managed by men seated upon the saddle-horse of each
  pair, and they dash through the street at a rapid gait, a bugle being
  sounded frequently by a man riding in advance, so as to have the way
  cleared for the passage of the royal cortege.

Footnote 10:

  Though this ant is so troublesome in the culture of the cotton grown
  from American seed, it does not attack the Brazilian cotton, which
  seems to be a variety of the sea island plant, that has been grown to
  a limited extent for a considerable period in Brazil. The stalk of
  this latter becomes very large, and really assumes the proportions of
  a small tree after growing three or four successive years. The lint is
  fine and the seed black and clean, but the yield is much less than the
  cotton from our ordinary short staple seed. The exemption from injury
  by the ant would constitute a very important recommendation if it
  produced as well as the other variety, but it is entirely abandoned
  since the introduction of the seed from the United States.

Footnote 11:

  At his suggestion, an article appeared in the _Diario De São Paulo_,
  of September 26th, 1865, from which the following extracts are
  translated:

  “This commission of Dr. Gaston arouses serious considerations. Under
  existing circumstances, our attention ought to be fixed, by
  preference, upon the States of the South of the American Union. A
  large portion of the party vanquished in the recent struggle will seek
  a new country. They cannot submit to the new order of things and live
  on a footing of equality with their slaves. Accumulated trouble, and
  various other reasons, concur to induce them to emigrate. If our
  government lose this favorable opportunity to draw them to our country
  it will not find another.

  “If these families come, many others will come after them, and thus
  spontaneous emigration will be developed for our country. In the
  disposition with which they are now proposing to emigrate, it is
  natural that they should flow into the same place, and the country
  which has the happiness to receive well the first emigrants will
  receive all.

  “The emigration from the States of the South of the Union is exactly
  that which suits us best. We do not want adventurers, who come into
  our country to gain fortunes, and that return to their domicils when
  they are secured. We want men who will establish themselves diligently
  in our country, and who will make common cause with us. The American
  emigrants that come will remain with us, and will never return to
  their country. The motives which induce the emigration afford us, in
  this respect, a complete guarantee. They procure a new country. They
  take as theirs the country which receives them. This consideration is
  important.

  “The Anglo-American race has no rival in the world. The grand struggle
  through which they have passed leaves their prominence well
  established. It is the race which is most appropriate for us.
  Eminently industrious, enterprising and persevering, it will impart a
  notable impulse to our country. It is not possible to calculate the
  rapid progress which the country may have if this race comes, to turn
  to advantage its natural resources.

  “Our political institutions cannot be repugnant to those inhabitants
  of the Union. In our country they will find all the liberty which can
  reasonably be desired. Our form of government, though it is not
  federative, approximates this system. The separate action of the
  provinces gives them, to a certain extent, an independent existence.

  “The spectacle of slavery, which so much impresses strangers, will be
  viewed with indifference by those emigrants from the Southern States
  of the Union, that until very recently held slaves, and for this
  object sustained the greatest struggle which the world has seen.

  “This subject deserves the special attention of the Government, whose
  lights and practical knowledge should guide the emissary of the
  emigrants in the selection of a locality that may be proper to receive
  them, giving him every means of enlightenment and information. The
  stranger, however qualified he may be, can easily be deceived in this
  respect.

  “All depends upon the success of the first emigrants, and for the
  accomplishment of this every care should be taken in this matter.

  “Our countrymen should not expect to sell their lands to these new
  emigrants for fabulous prices. If they bring some means they cannot
  nevertheless employ large capitals, because they have not got them.
  They once had fortunes, but the war has wasted them. The devastation
  which passed over the States of the South is well known.”

Footnote 12:

  A notice has since appeared in the public prints of the falling down
  of this building, and the killing of several workmen. It is attributed
  to some excavation made in the vicinity of the wall, but the
  construction was such as might favor its downfall, and the use of the
  term ruin in the description implies such a condition.

Footnote 13:

  It is not usual to find pepper, vinegar, catsup, mustard, or any thing
  of this kind upon the tables of the common people in the country, and
  hence the presence of these articles becomes a fact worthy of notice.

Footnote 14:

  This expression, and the same placing of the hands with the palms
  together in front of the breast are observed also by children in
  approaching a parent for the first time after rising in the morning,
  or after being absent for a time. It is a common practice among the
  better class of people, and even after the children are grown.

Footnote 15:

  The valuation placed by the owner upon this portion of the land is ten
  thousand ($10,000) dollars, and taking the amount of productive land
  as only three thousand (3,000) acres, having in all one hundred
  thousand coffee trees, the calculation per acre of three and a third
  ($3.33⅓) dollars is certainly very much more favorable than most
  improved land can be bought elsewhere in this region of country.

Footnote 16:

  The owner of the land proposes to take seven thousand five hundred
  dollars ($7,500) for the lands lying adjacent to the river Roque,
  which are supposed to include two thousand acres of good land, but
  estimated as containing more than double that amount by the
  proprietor.

  The body of land described as of superior quality, in a southwest
  course from the buildings, with the site of the fazenda, are not
  offered for sale.

  A few families might be accommodated with these lands, but they are
  not adapted for a large settlement of people.

  At one point the Roque tract is said to connect with Angelica, and if
  that territory can be bought upon similar terms, it would permit
  extension of the population; but, as was stated, Senor Vergueiro
  declined to name the price fixed upon that property.

Footnote 17:

  A very fine specimen of brown sandstone was found in large quantity
  upon this land, and the fact is mentioned to illustrate the resources
  of the country.

Footnote 18:

  I am constantly reminded of my obligations to this gentleman in the
  use of a fine large blank-book, which was presented by him for my
  records, besides many other acts of kindness on his part.

Footnote 19:

  Members of the same family very generally have different names in
  Brazil; and when a family name is recognized, it is not always placed
  last as with us, but is arranged with the other names as fancy may
  suggest.

Footnote 20:

  I am informed that extensive hat-factories are in operation in
  Perecicaba, Rio Claro, Campinas and in the province of Minas, where
  they are made in several of the fazendas. They are prepared of good
  quality from both fur and wool, but the price of the latter should
  secure an excellent article.

Footnote 21:

  There is no tax on lands except a small per cent. paid at the time of
  purchase, and that even is not required in the sale of government land
  to our people.

Footnote 22:

  Captain Lie tells me this custom of shaking hands all round after
  dinner is very common with the families of Norway when there is
  company at their houses. It is not general in Brazil, but so far as
  observed, is confined to this family, and I supposed that all were
  taking leave to depart for their respective homes, but found that they
  repaired to the parlor for further social intercourse.

Footnote 23:

  In the midst of all this poverty it is most remarkable that theft is
  very rare in this country, and throughout every class of people there
  seems to be no necessity for any special safeguards to property of any
  description.

  Even in the towns and cities through which I have passed there are
  fewer precautions observed against larceny than is customary in all
  parts of the United States, and the general confidence manifested in
  the honesty of the people is a very commendable feature of society.

Footnote 24:

  This amount, in common with other expenses of travel, was paid by the
  agent of the government, Senor G. D. Street, and while noting the want
  of generosity on the part of this representative man of Conceicão, I
  would not fail to acknowledge our obligations for the bounty of the
  Brazilian government in providing for all our wants while exploring
  the country.

Footnote 25:

  On arrival at this place we found a portion of the men seated upon the
  dirt floor of a house playing cards for money, while the more
  religiously-inclined population were assembled in the church to pray
  for a cessation of the continuous rains which flooded the lands. So go
  the different elements of society.

Footnote 26:

  As a matter of history, the following paragraph of a correspondent
  from this place, of September 18, 1865, to the Diario de São Paulo, is
  translated, though I hear of no other instance of the kind in this or
  any other part of the province.

  Within little more than one month there has occurred in this section
  seven assassinations of Christian people, namely: those of Sonsa, his
  son and son-in-law, by the Indians of São Domingos, that of Filisbino,
  according to report, by his native slave Silverio, on the Rio Novo;
  those of Francisco Bernardo, and Leopoldina Cordoso Martines, in the
  same region, and that of Salvador José Leite, on the small river Das
  Pedras.

Footnote 27:

  Major Meriwether writes me as follows:

  “BOTOCATU, January 8, 1866.—I was not prepared to see lands so
  immensely rich as we see here. We have examined the country ten miles
  in one direction, and every foot of it is the very best quality.
  Immense bodies of the best land are here.

  “January 13, 1866.—We have just returned this day from Lençoes, taking
  five days to make the trip there and back, forty or more miles, to
  avoid crossing a belt of country fifty miles wide, in which the chills
  prevail unusually severe. In going to and returning from Lençoes, not
  on the same road both ways, we were never off good land, and the most
  of it first quality terra rocha. Corn was certainly the best I ever
  saw, and not a plough in all the country. Coffee trees, none of which
  are over four years old, loaded down with fruit. Cotton, little
  planted, but that little very fine. Grasses in abundance; and stock,
  mules, horses, cattle and hogs as fine as any country can grow.

  “I have visited the fine stockgrowing portions of Kentucky and
  Tennessee, but this beats all ever seen before.

  “In addition to growing grain, coffee, sugar and cotton grow as finely
  here as in any other part of the province. Farms can be purchased in
  this and the adjoining district, with good improvements in the shape
  of dwellings, sugar-mills, grist-mills, &c., for $2.50 per acre and
  less, that being the highest price asked, and $1.50 per acre being the
  usual price asked for lands as good as lands can be.

  “The best information as to depth of soil is, that it averages about
  thirteen (13) feet deep. From the best information we can get, the
  good land extends fifty or sixty miles in length and ten or twelve in
  breadth. It is not uncommon to see trees seven (7) feet in diameter
  here.

  “The people here treat us with great hospitality, and are exceedingly
  anxious for our people to come amongst them, offering inducements the
  most substantial, provisions, &c. If this country is ever peopled by
  an industrious and progressive race it will soon be a paradise on
  earth.

  “I have thus tried to describe this immensely fertile tract of
  country, but the description is poor in comparison to the reality. It
  is the most desirable I ever expected even to see.

  “I have changed my mind in regard to the expense of settling in this
  country. When it was said by Mr. Street that we must not expect to use
  ploughs the first few years here, I laughed at him. But he is right.

  “A single man can here clear and fence and plant ten acres of land in
  two months.

  “Five acres will make him at least two hundred and fifty bushels of
  corn, the other five will make him as much cotton as he can pick,
  without other culture than the hoe. So that not only a support may be
  made the first year, but also money may be saved.”

  In connection with this communication, it is proper to state that
  there are large numbers of uncivilized Indians near that region, and
  that “not long since the neighboring district of São João Baptista was
  the victim of an outbreak of these savages,” as is stated in the
  public prints. Facts are important guides to us.

Footnote 28:

  This embrace consists in passing the arms round each other, much in
  the same manner that is observed when two boys are about to engage in
  wrestling, and is resorted to very generally among Brazilian
  gentlemen, to express a particular regard upon meeting or parting with
  each other.

Footnote 29:

  In addition to the other remarkable things, two very large cobras were
  encountered and killed by one of my attendants. This is a most
  venomous serpent, and resembles very much the rattle-snake in its
  shape and color. These were found close together, and were supposed to
  be male and female. Each was lying quietly upon a separate stump of a
  large tree, and seemed to bask in the warm sun without any sense of
  danger.

                  “They are so unacquainted with man,
                      Their tameness is shocking to me.”

  Upon seeing the first this man alighted and cut a stick, walking up
  deliberately, so as to strike a deadly blow, without any movement on
  the part of the snake.

  He had remounted when the other was observed, and the same process was
  repeated with it as the first. Both were wide awake, and kept their
  sly wicked gaze fixed upon their slayer as he advanced, ready to
  destroy him if he had afforded the opportunity.

  With the exception of a small specimen, about a foot and a half long,
  killed near the Jacaré river, these are the only cobras seen during
  the tour, and they are unusually large, being three feet long, with a
  thickness such as a rattle-snake of similar length would have. The
  bite of one of these serpents, without a prompt remedy on hand, is
  considered certainly fatal to man or beast, but fortunately they do
  not seem to be numerous in any part visited.

Footnote 30:

  The only means of cleaning the cotton used at this place are sundry
  little hand-rollers, worked by little darkies, which cannot average
  over two pounds each to the day.

  The spirit of enterprise is sadly deficient along this river, though
  the communication of the steamboat could place any thing at their
  doors that might be desired.

Footnote 31:

  A considerable lot of cotton gathered from these stalks lies in the
  seed at the residence, and does not give evidence of nice handling,
  but the fibre is good. Even with the spirit of progress which Senor
  Miguel manifests in his appliances generally, the little hand-roller
  is his only reliance for picking cotton, and hence this seed cotton
  remains on hand.

  He has attempted to use an English apparatus with a roughened roller,
  but apart from the insufficiency of size it is totally unfitted for
  accomplishing any satisfactory results. He is now impressed with the
  necessity of supplying himself with a good cotton-gin to meet the
  demands of his forthcoming crops here and at Ponto-Grosso.

  The want of information as to the conditions for proper culture of
  cotton is shown in the planting of sugar-cane among the cotton, and
  yet I counted upon a single limb of one branch of a large stalk in
  that field twenty-two bolls, the entire stalk having certainly over
  two hundred bolls.

Footnote 32:

  This troublesome fly is found to a greater or less extent in various
  parts of the country, and seems to attack some animals in a herd in
  preference to others. There may be something in the particular stock
  of cattle rendering them more liable than others, and it seems that
  those in the best condition are generally more exempt; but this may be
  an effect rather than a cause, as the presence of these festering
  points over a large portion of the surface must prevent the animal
  from thriving that is so affected.

  One of these insects imbedded its germ in two points upon my person,
  and I subsequently extracted a rough ugly-looking sort of worm from
  one of the places, which was near my shoulder, and consequently under
  the clothing. It is a mystery as to how the fly could deposit the germ
  through a flannel shirt, which was worn at the time. This result is
  liable to occur with children in localities where the fly prevails,
  and I have no fancy for living amongst them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 Page Changed from                     Changed to

  112 seja nosso sentor Jesus Christ,” seja nosso senhor Jesus Christ,”
      that is said by almost every     that is said by almost every

 ● Typos fixed; non-standard spelling and dialect retained.
 ● Used numbers for footnotes, placing them all at the end of the last
     chapter.
 ● Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 ● Enclosed blackletter font in =equals=.
